
	$Id$

This is a simple management plan for DODS. 

Goals:
Become the data interoperability layer for the NASA ESIP Federation.

	Do this by extending our servers so they provide `ease of use'
	services in addition to `ease of access'. Simultaneously, develop a
	simple data location tool to which others can add value and a
	comprehensive suite of client programs. Add data sites in a focused
	mannor giving preference to ones which complement exisiting sites.
	Later add sites which open new types of data.

Policy:

Return to the Glenn, Peter, James strategy model with Richard as ex officio.
	This must be an in-person meeting
	Duration: about a day
	Location: RI, Boston

When interacting with other groups, solidify the relation with a MOU 
	Always involve both technical and management in a MOU
	Consider the impacts of other efforts

Realistic time assessments
	People doing work should provide an estimate of the time required

		Before we start a new task, there should be an estimate of
		the time it will require. This estimate should be made by the
		person(s) who will actually do the task. The estimate should 
		also define exactly what will be included in the `first
		version' or what it means to `complete' this task. In the
		former case, what will/should be included in follow on
		versions should also be described, albeit more briefly than
		the initial version's description. If this to be an on-going
		process, there should be a description of the continued
		work needed.

	The estimate should be broken into small blocks of time

		The estimate should break the problem do into small things
		that will take no more than two weeks to do. If that's not
		possible (and in some cases it is really not) then we should
		understand that there is a high degree of variability in the
		estimate. That's OK, so long as we know and accept that.

	Tie the estimation to the work description

		Breaking the estimate down into small pieces will help flesh
		out ideas which appear simple but are, in fact, quite
		complicated. 

	Estimates should be written down

		Time estimates are very hard to get correct, and this is
		exacerbated when the thing you're estimating has never been
		done before. However, by writing down an estimate so that it
		can be reviewed later, it is possible to build up skill in
		estimation and build up knowledge about the types of problems
		that appear over and over again in a particular project. Put
		another way, you can learn estimation. It is important to
		make sure people feel comfortable (or minimally
		uncomfortable) with this since it can feel as if people are
		being graded. 

Groups:
	Management oversight will be provided by Richard.
		1) Monitor system usability, especially WRT UIs
			a) Are they easy to get?
			b) Obvious flaws reported?
		2) Interact with the Federation
			a) Metrics
			b) Clusters - ours and others
			c) Meetings
		3) Organize our participation at AGU meetings - the face that
		   we present at these meetings (posters, booth, handouts,
		   demos) 
		4) Monitor compliance with funding
			a) Track the milestones in the proposals
			b) Submit reports, etc. to funding agencies
		5) Track progress on project tasks
			a) Organize and maintain a list of tasks (web, project)
			b) Organize meetings (telecons and in-person).

	Overall organization will be provided by Peter.

- Choose a direction for the project and evaluate our progress towards it.
  Forget the small tasks; that's for Dan, Richard and myself. If I say that
  the core will be stable by early December, how does it look mid-November? 

- Choose avenues of funding. You know the people, the agencies and can match
  them with the project's goal(s).

- Make sure that we are represented well within the federation and in other
  situations (i.e., that someone from DODS is on the `right' technical and
  policy committees).

- Use DODS. Problems found should be fixed, but deficiencies cannot
  necessarily be addressed right away. Resist the urge to adopt quick fixes.

- Evaluate new tasks in light of our goal(s). Does the proposed thing really
  further our objective(s) or does it just look cool? This is a really tough
  one since the thing that makes a research group tick is its ability to
  pursue stuff that's off the beaten path, but too much of that and you're
  sunk. 

	The strategic position of the project will be reviewed by the `Gang
	of Four' (Glenn, Peter, James and Richard) every 6 months at an
	in-person meeting.

	Dods will divide itself into two main groups: The core, or system,
	software group and the Clients and Data group. The core group will be
	lead by James and the Clients and Data group will be lead by Dan.

The overall technical coordination of the project will be James'
responsibility. This means choosing which goals should be addressed by
software and, of those, how they fit in with the rest of the system.

Dan will be responsible for overseeing design and implementation of those
parts of the project that fall under the Client and Data umbrella. This will
include who does what and when. Similarly, James will oversee those parts of
the project that are part of the system's infrastructure (which we have
called the `core').

When there's a question as to where a particular thing falls, Dan and James
will assign it to one of the two groups, even though the assignment might be
arbitrary.

	The two main groups will meet via teleconference every two weeks.

	It is possible that some people will be in both the Core and Clients
	and Data groups.

