From an email to John Caron:

Well, Here's what I've finally settled on doing: First I freeze the
code. That means no more new features. Then I make a bunch of release
candidates (same as beta) and we work the bugs out. When there are no
more bugs in the bug database that we're going to fix (i.e., the
remaining bugs all require a new feature to fix), then it's done. The
existing bugs should be documented in a KNOWN BUGS kind of a thing (but
we've never done that...).

So, to answer the question, should it be released, I'd say look at the
bugs and ask yourself how those will/should be fixed. If they all will
require a feature change, it's time to release.

James

Dan's comments on the non-code activities involved in releasing software
(11/14/2002): 

Other than issues in the implementation, what's required to make
this an 'operational' element of the project?

  - what's required to go from 'beta' to 'public'.
      - is the documentation sufficient?
      - is the web-site current?
      - is support capable of answering questions
         on the software? (install/use)
      - does support understand the current limitations?
      - is support aware of the impact of the Java-DAP
         dds/das parser limitations with regard to this
         software?
      - is there software devel. resources available to
         resolve problems with the AS when identified.

   - should the current suite of client applications be
       updated to start using AggServers when available?
       - matlab GUI / ODC.
       - does the Dataset List contain any references
           AS installations?

   - should we assist providers (JPL/USF/GSFC) with
      installation/configuration?

Dan

From an email from Ethan:

> Once the release branch builds:
> 
> 1) Release the source as 'Release candidate 1'
     a) Declare CVS branch frozen
     b) Tag the branch for RC1 release, e.g., "release-3-4-RC1"
     c) Merge the branch back onto trunk
     d) checkout RC1 release
     e) Make source tar files
     f) Place on ftp site
     g) Make sure web site is updated
     h) Announce "Release Candidate 1"
> 2) Begin building binaries
> 3) as binaries build, release, noting they are 'RC1'
> 4) fix bugs, if no major bugs exist (my call ;-), goto 7
> 5) generate new source
> 6) goto 1 and increment the RC number.
> 7) make a formal (non-beta) release

I wrote #1-#7, Ethan added a-h.

