
	$Id$

Tasks from the June 1998 workshop on DODS

The main tasks listed here are, in reality, very broad categories. They need
to be refined to define specific things which can be finished quickly. The
ongoing/minor tasks are those things that we have started and must continue
to support the project or are those tasks which we should do before making
decisions about the future direction of the project.

New tasks:

1. Catalog Services
2. Translation

Ongoing or minor tasks:

a. GUIs
b. Core
c. Servers
d. NetCDF client-library
e. Java testing
f. CORBA testing

Description of the tasks

1. Catalog Services

This task involves defining and implementing the software that will provide
access to information about datasets in a uniform manner. It almost certainly
will entail choosing a way to represent that information since no one has yet
said that standard X is clearly the best choice for us to use. 

We will start work on this by determining what information is required by the
current GUIs and building a service that provides that information. 

Dan and I will work on this.

2. Translation

This task involves translation of data types, particularly Sequence to/from
Array. Reza has this one pretty much nailed down but server building is
competing for his time. In fact, if you realistically look at the time
required to finish/build servers for FreeForm, the French people, GRIB and
BUFR there is no time for him to work on translation between no and the next
six months. That is, I think that those four things are about six months of
work. It may turn out that those do no require all of a six month block of
time, but it would be foolish to plan on.

I am very concerned about this task because it relates directly to the
veracity of our claim that DODS renders datasets format neutral. I think we
should talk about getting someone else to write these servers. 

a. GUIs

Included in this set of tasks are the Matlab, IDL, Java and Web interfaces. I
think we have been successful in getting Peter Fox to champion the IDL and
Web interfaces. Elaine's group will also do an IDL GUI. I'm not sure who is
going to handle the Java GUI. 

The Matlab GUI represents a problem because I'm not sure how far from done it
is. I should know fairly soon since Deirdre gets back on the 18th of July. I
may start to do some of the work I have allocated to her before she gets
back. That will depend on my load.

b. Core

Included here are general improvements to the core software base of DODS.
Better caching, better support for ancillary documents, performance testing
and various fixes (String --> string, Jake's read() fixes). For the most part
I should do these.

c. Servers

These are FreeForm, The French people, GRIB and BUFR. Figure six months for
these. As I said above, I wonder if someone besides Reza might do all but the
FreeForm one? How about Brian Wolf?

d. NetCDF client-library

This category of tasks encompasses all this is needed to keep this code
going. Reza is the logical choice.

e. Java testing
f. CORBA testing

These two testing tasks are for evaluating newer technologies so that we know
what's up. I'll do these. 