
	$Id$


James,

Interface looks good although (and I hear this a lot about the browser)
it's not obvious what to do.  

Looking at COADS:

At first, I just typed in some constraints to COADSX COADSY TIME 
and SST.  I used:

COADSX: 0:1:29
COADSY 0:1:29
TIME 0:0
SST 0:0 0:1:29 0:1:29

I asked for ASCII data.  I got a new Netscape window with the message:

Error:

Not very illuminating.

Then I noticed the little radio buttons.  So I clicked on the
readio buttons for TIME, COADSX COADSY and SST.  They reset my
constraints to the whole dataset range.  I modified these slightly
to read:

COADSX: 0:1:29
COADSY 0:1:29
TIME 0:1:0
SST 0:1:0 0:1:29 0:1:29

I again asked for ASCII data.  I got:

Error:

Then I tried getting just the default ranges.  I was able to get COADSX and 
COADSY and TIME as ASCII data, but not SST, or UWND or VWND or AIRT.

I am using Netscape v4.06[en]-98225.

----------------------------------

Hi James,

I tried out the ifh. I think that it is a good start. I did however
have some problems with it and have some comments on usability.

Problem: I filled in the form, but it wasn't clear what I had to
do to get a dump of the data. I used the FNOC dataset. 

Usability: (1) I found the metadata stuff to be useful at first,
but it quickly became an obstacle to easy use. For a dataset with
a lot of variables, the form could get very long indeed. One 
approach might be to make that information optional. This could
be done either by an optional hot link for each variable for
such information and/or a dataset wide switch. My preference
would be for both. While I am learning how to use the interface
I would want it in the show everything mode. When I become a
pro I would prefer not to see all that stuff, but would like the
option of calling it up for any variable.

(2) The metadata stuff is accessible in the form; i.e., the
user can type into this area. It is not obvious to me why that
is the case. This is not something that the user can change or
select on is it? 

(3) If I enter <cr> it goes to the next box. That is fine except
that it goes into the metadata box and then an additional <cr>
simply put blank lines in the box. Back to (2) above. If you
agree that this should not be accessible, then (3) goes away.

(4) It seems like there should be a "how to use this interface"
button. I know enough about DODS to know about projection and
selection, but most users will not, so the check box for a variable
may not be clear. 

(5) Since the new servers can access information about longitude
and latitude range in order to do the fancy geophysical constraints
for grids, it seems that the form should also make use of thie
information; i.e., allow the user to select longitude and latitude
(and maybe other constraints such as date and time) using thise
constraints. The ifh should present the data to the user this way.
I am not sure how to handle this. The array information along
with the lat and lon limits provide a feel for the resolution,
how much data you will get for a given request, but they are
a pain to use. Additionally some users may prefer to give the
grid range while others the geophysical range. Maybe a switch
for grids that allows the user to toggle between computer notation
and geophysical notation (and selection) would be good.

------------------------------

Just quik feedback:

Form and JavaScript seem to work fine on my NT using NetScape 4.5

The form almost serves a double purpose as a URL constructor tutorial 

On your first URL, however, I tried this request and got a response of
simply "Error:"  Other URLs I tried worked fine.

http://www.dods.org/test/nph-nc/data/nc/fnoc1.nc?u[0:1:2][0:1:16][0:1:10]

"Disposition" is an interesting word to choose ... usually would refer
to "Keep", "Delete", etc. in this context.

Kind of odd to se "Data to Matlab" ... but would look good in the
company of "HDF" and "netCDF" as output options.

On the FreeForm example I tried fvar and svar>0 (figuring the svar
constraint would also constrain fvar?). It looks like the wrong URL was
generated:
	http://www.dods.org/etc/nph-ff/data/ff/test1.dat?svar1&svar1>0
so there were no fvar results. (Also, the URL wasn't generated until I
actually requested the data.

-----------------------------

Hi James,

Sorry for taking up yet more of your time ... Its only BLUE SKY stuff to
think about when the pressure is off.

The challenge that you have described on many occasions is that the Web
browser has no obvious way to trigger the "loadDODS" command in MATLAB
... thus the browsing process has had to be made quasi-internal to
MATLAB to get the level of integration desired.

My question is whether the following approach might work:

1. User with Web browser requests "MATLAB format" data from server

2. Web server sends data file back as a MIME type -- call it ".MAT"

3. Browser is configured to run a script -- fire off a helper program --
when inputs of type .MAT are received

4. The script tells MATLAB to load the file (typically saved in /tmp
under some funky name)

We use this procedure to launch Ferret when a netCDF file comes in from
the browser or to launch Excel when a comma-delimited file shows up.

There is an additional challenge to making sure that the same MATLAB
image that the user is already running is the one that gets the LOAD
command .... I don't know MATLAB details but I imaging it has some
mechanism like a signal that you can send to it that causes it to
execute the commands in ~/.matlab or some such thing.

Your experiences or thoughts?

--------------------------------

Looks very clean. It will be great to throw a search engine onto the "web" of
DODS sites after this interface gets propagated out to data suppliers. If
"collections" are suitably implemented, they can appear (later) as a part of this
directory tree, too.

I have reservations about the final HTML forms interface ... though only minor
reservations. As an HTML form the display of a files structure and attributes is
not near as clean looking as it is in the straight HTML text versions. What about
using the text version as an intermediate: click on ...
    directory
        --> subdirectory
            --> foobar.nc
                 --> "get data" on text version of DAS/DDS
                    --> your forms interface to get data

    - steve

minor note: the HELP links (e.g. "Global Attributes":) are broken

    http://dcz.dods.org/dods/query-help.html#global_attr
    Forbidden

    You don't have permission to access /dods/query-help.html
    on this server.

