Searching the Universe of DODS Data Sets

    Statement of Problem

An end-to-end scientific data system must provide 3 fundamental components
1. locating data sets (search)
2. evaluating data sets (browse)
3. delivering data (delivery)
4. utilizing data (analysis and visualization)

Historically, most distributed data systems (e.g. NOAAServer, US Navy/MEL,
...) have approached the development of their systems beginning first with
the machinery of component one -- data-base wide search. These systems have
relied on metadata that is maintained independently from the data sets,
themselves, often utilizing the FGDC metadata standard. Certain limitations
descend from this approach: 1. The metadata contents is inadequate for
precise geo-special searching. Although the FGDC standard is broad enough to
include coordinate information, in typical usage only a bounding rectangle is
included. This means, for example, that low resolution global gridded data
sets match on all spatial searches - even, for example, searches for a small,
named bay or estuary. 2. The metadata is frequently incomplete or out of
date. Managing metadata records independently from the data sets, themselves,
increases the likelihood that the metadata will not be 100% faithful to the
data.

The DODS development path has been the reverse of this order - concentrating
initially on the development of component three -- a client-server framework
emphasizing easily installed servers and direct binary delivery of both data
and metadata to clients. DODS focuses on self-describing data where metadata
and data are united. For legacy formats, where metadata may be lacking, DODS
provides simple mechanisms based on ASCII files, for completing the
self-description.

To date, the DODS project has not directed significant energies to the
problem of searching. With the infrastructure that is now in place, however,
DODS has built a foundation upon which a metadata and search strategy of
superlative quality can be built.

    A Framework for Building DODS Search Engines - the DODS WebCrawler

There is no uniquely correct interface or set of search criteria for broad
data set searching, any more than there is a uniquely correct data format or
scientific analysis tool. An appropriate search strategy for DODS is to
develop a framework for building search engines, much as it has developed a
framework for connecting applications to remote data sets. The search
framework can build upon the ability of DODS to query the data sets,
themselves, to harvest detailed metadata, including the coordinate
information directly from data sets.

The foundation of this framework is the concept of a DODS "WebCrawler", a
network robot that will recursively explore DODS servers, descending through
subdirectories to individual files, recording DODS path names, variables,
attributes, and coordinates. The data base created by this robot can be
stored and searched to fit the particular needs of individual projects. One
such project, of course, would be a "generic" DODS search engine that
catalogs and searches the entire universe of DODS data sets (as well,
potentially, as non-DODS data sets).

    Proposed Work

In year one of this proposal PMEL will develop a prototype DODS WebCrawler.
The WebCrawler will be built as portable modules, written in perl or Java.
The modules will be customizable so that, for example, the output of the
WebCrawler may be stored in a commercial data base manager. PMEL will create
a demonstration searchable data base and link it to a data browse and
retrieval system. The resulting demonstration will be presented and discussed
at the national DODS meeting near the end of year one. Based on those
discussions a generic DODS search project will be proposed for the out years,
likely spearheaded by an experienced member organization such as NASA/GCMD.

