Year-end DODS software development

The principle focus of the development of DODS involves the design and
implementation of two types of software: the DODS API and matched DODS data
servers and DODS client libraries.  This software is intended to be used both
by the DODS team at URI to analyze the effectiveness of DODS's data delivery
architecture and to enable programmers at other institutions to build
DODS-compliant modules tailored to their systems. The bulk of the software
developed during this phase of DODS will be in C++, with some work done in
ANSI C. In addition, we have decided to use the World Wide Web software as a
base for the DODS data servers. This simplifies and standardizes the
transmission components of DODS and provides for a powerful, seamless
interface between the data delivery components and the separately developed
data location system.

In order to build the API translation components described in the data
delivery architecture and design papers, there must be some realization of
the DODS API. This API differs for APIs such as netCDF or HDF in that it is
implemented in two pieces - one a client part and one a server part. The
client part of the DODS API is used to build DODS-compliant `surrogate
libraries' which present the same interface as some existing data access API
(e.g., netcdf) but instead translate those API function calls into DODS calls
which send information to a remote DODS data server.

The client part of the DODS API is used to build new implementations of
existing `user APIs' where each of these new implementations accesses data
using a common set of operations that are independent of storage format.  In
order to access data using this common set of operations, DODS data servers
must translate each of those operations into the access methods used by the
data set which they provide access. The server part of the DODS API
generalizes some of this translation by providing a skeleton which server
implementors can use to greatly simplify building the data server.

In addition to the construction of the DODS API client and server parts, we
will be constructing two complete sample surrogate libraries and data
servers, one for the netcdf API and one for the JGOFS API. Once built, these
components will allow any program which uses netcdf or JGOFS to read any of
the data sets accessible via a DODS data server. furthermore, and data set
stored in either netcdf or JGOFS will be a potential `DODS accessible data
set'.

The two complete sample systems will form the basis for further analysis of
the basic data delivery architecture and design. In addition, combined with
documentation they will server as pedagogical tools for two workshops to be
held at URI where programmers from various institutions will learn how to
build DODS software components so that their data will be accessible to the
Internet community. It is important to note that will there is a learning
curve for library or server builders, there is none for people who want to
use the software we will develop. As our previous work with the RPC based
servers has shown, users can simplely relink their programs with a DODS
surrogate library and access networked data without modifying or adding to
any part of their program.


