$Id$

Notes from the SIGNIDR Meeting held at the National Archives in Greenbelt MD
on 3/24/95.

Elliot Christian (USGS):

``Status Report on the Government Locator Service''
E.C. is the designer of GILS. 

Server-based searching is `mass market' (i.e. ``We know what you want'').
Current clients are dumb.
GILS must evolve.
GILS is mandated by an law.
GILS is a record-based, Z39.50 system.
Z39.50 is now at version 3.x.
May IITF meeting; demos only, high profile attendees.
GILS list: listproc@cni.org, subscribe GILS
WWW: http://www.usgs.gov/gils

In private conversation:
Strongly agrees that there is no real distinction between data and meta data.
Agrees that Z39.50 is *not* appropriate for DODS Data delivery.
Describes DODS data delivery as `analysis' rather than search.


Avra Michelson (MITRE):

``MITRE's Information Locator Project:Government Agencies Sharing
Information''

Their locator may/may not be GILS compliant (didn't know).
Locate information in various systems.
Done for intelligence agencies, so there are many security problems.
Main problems were with access to public information within the secure system.
Diverse users.
Wanted to identify gaps in addition to catalogs.
Data types: pictures, maps, sound.
Definition of scope: most important milestone.
Controlled vocabularies: necessary but not sufficient.
Thesaurus: present different views to different users using Thesaurus for tx.
Collecting information: its hard to get people to comply.
Users need $ or people (site visit) to add data to system.
There is need for up-front consensus building.
Iterative search is a new paradigm for users.

Chuck Stein (Mirror imaging/NRL Monterey, CA):

``The Master Environmental Library(MEL): An [sic] NIDR System using WWW/WAIS
Technology: Metadata Standards and Standard Transfer Formats''

I missed most of this, but it is NEONS.
All data stored in a database (OO).
All data centralized.
Clear distinction between data and metadata.

In private conversation:
Knows about DODS to some degree, but not about our `no metadata' stance.
Commented that we are working on the same problem from opposite ends; he may
have a point.

Douglas Oard (U. of MD, College Park):

``Filtering Networked Information Resources: Issues, Approaches, and
Experimental System''

Types: Programmable systems, Learning systems, Collaborative systems.
Many have been implemented.

Archie Warnock (A/WWW Enterprises):

``The Electronic Astrophysical Journal Letters and Network Resource
Location''

AJL are going to be online.
It will be a copy of the paper edition; they won't eliminate the paper ed.
Since the Letters is currently free, billing is not addressed.
Version tracking is an issue (as this go to the typesetter).
He uses URCs (UR citations) so that references aren't mach. dependent.
URCs are implemented using a URL to a CGI resolver.

Met with Archie Warnock privately:

He is still very interested in DODS, although he's left Huges/STX.
He has built (w/Jim Fulton) a Z39.50 system which will work with our servers.
We should talk with him more about the design.
This could be a migration path which would give us some GILS compliance.
This does not change how data are accessed.
The `locator' is used for the first iterations of the search process.
Suggested that URCs could be used by DODS.

Carroll Hood (CIESIN Earth System Program Coordinator):

``CIESIN Gateway & Information Cooperative: A globally Distributed
Information Locator System''

Uses Z39.50 and is not GILS compliant but will be soon.
Strong distinction between data and metadata.
Can perform several remote searches simultaneously.
Client Cannot search (dumb client).
Client runs on IBM PC and UNIX.
System works on metadata only.
Currently uses DIS, but will change for GILS.

Overall impressions:

DODS was well received by those that stayed to the end of the meeting.

My statement that there was no difference between data and metadata did not
cause much uproar (some people did not agree, but most did).

However, the tone of the conference was very much in favor of systems that
were essentially metadata systems. 

I think the explanation for this contradiction (that most people see there
is no such thing as metadata in and of itself and yet continue to build systems
predicated on such a thing) is that the system designers don't know how to
break out of the metadata mind set.

While Z39.50 is a powerful query metalanguage, it is so poorly suited to
analysis (for lack of a better term) that it is not usable.

Many people see working with actual data as an analysis function, which may
be in part true and also a function of the afore mentioned metadata mind
set. 

GILS is a standard that will only store simple text records. Period. If
anything called GILS ever stores something else, it will be a different GILS.

Gills is purely a search mechanism.

Interestingly, both GILS and Z39.50 (GILS is one query language defined using
the Z39.50 metalanguage) are specifically intended to put uniform search
front-ends on disparate systems. In other words, it is intended to be a
translation mechanism for searches, much as the DODS DAP is a translation
mechanism for data access.

It was clear that DODS will permit the development of intelligent
clients. Many people see the current generation of systems as lacking in this
capacity.
