
Goals for the Ancillary Information Service (AIS)

AIS Goal: Level 3 interoperability at the data level in 
    the DODS environment.

Definitions: 

Level 3 interoperability: semantically meaningful machine-to-machine
interoperability. 

Data Level: related to the use of data as opposed to the discovery of
datasets. 

DODS environment: distributed, heterogeneous data sets on the network
accessed via the DODS DAP.

Plain dataset: A dataset that contains only information in the original
datafile(s) or database.

Network server: A daemon process that listens for requests using one or more
sockets. 

Attributes: Members of a DAS object.

Variables: Members of a DDS object.

[ These assumptions are really part of the Goal, they are not the kind of
assumptions that drive design. I put them in Scope (Section 1.2) of the SRS.
]

Assumptions: 

1) Complete and consistent syntactic and semantic use 
   metadata are required to achieve Level 3 interoperability.

2) We will not be able to achieve complete and consistent
   semantic use metadata by adding information at only data server locations.

[ I moved this to Product Functions (Section 2.2) of the SRS. ]
Functional Requirements:

1) MUST provide a way to change for consistency or to add
   for completeness Attributes (translational use metadata)
   of or to existing datasets.

2) MUST provide a way to add for completeness (independent)
   Variables to existing datasets. 

3) MUST support making these changes on the computer serving
   the data, on the client computer or on any other computer 
   on the network.

3a) SHOULD support users making those changes without running 
   a network server.

4) Access to an augmented dataset MUST not be logically different 
   from a plain dataset. Clients should be able to use URLs which 
   reference both types of datasets interchangeably.

5) The user MUST be allowed to make use of any combination of 
   AIS DDSs and/or DASs to modify the DDS and/or DAS of a 
   requested data set.

6) There MUST be a way to associate public sites providing 
   additions/changes to a given dataset. 

[ I moved this into the Constraints (Section 2.4) of the SRS. ]

Performance Requirements:

1) Performance should be comparable to plain access. Response time 
   increase should be minimal. [To determine if this is the case, 
   we should measure the performance of candidate architectures.]

Constraints:

Changes to the current URL syntax should be limited or we should plan on
building a service that hides additional complexity in the URLs.

The AIS should use as much of the WWW/HTTP infrastructure as possible,
building its own infrastructure only when necessary. This will lead to a
system that is first and foremost `document based,' which will make
deployment and testing simpler.

$Id$