
Distributed Oceanographic Data Systems Workshop:

     The following is a proposal for a set of documents that will be provided
     at the workshop to the participants.  These documents are seen as
     reference materials that will play an important role in helping us to
     achieve the goals of the workshop.  There are two types of documents
     that will be developed: Technical Documents and Overview Documents.
     Each of the documents is presented below with the rational for its
     development and the role that it will play at the meeting.

Technical Documentation:
 
  Strawman System Design with Requirements.

      This document will serve as the impetus for the DODS requirements
      document -- the primary product of this workshop. This document will
      outline the different components of the system. In addition, it will
      describe how these components relate to one set of requirements, and
      how the requirements themselves are separated into three distinct 
      categories (science, software, and system).

      We will need to outline system components (client, server, network),
      objects (communication, data, interface), total functionality and the
      specific functionality of individual system components.  It will also
      be useful to reference other network systems that may be employed to
      perform or provide specific resources.

      This document is not intended to be a detailed specification of the
      infrastructure and design of the system but a generalized view of a
      possible configuration and would serve as a point of departure for
      discussions. 

  Engineering Document.

      This document outlines the systematic approach that will be used to
      develop the system. It will draw heavily on existing software
      engineering techniques and will provide a discrete view of
      the different tasks required to develop the system. It will provide a
      methodology for building a multi-component system where specific
      components will be developed independently and at different times. The
      software engineering documentation will provide a means for describing
      all aspects of the systems development.

      This document will also underscore the comprehensive approach that is
      being taken in the development of DODS system; a fact which can only be
      viewed in good light by funding agencies.

  Timeline Document.

      This document is intended to detail the project milestones.  It will
      more than likely undergo revision as a result of the meeting, but it
      would be important to have as a guide for the project at the meeting.
      This document will integrate the Strawman Document within the software
      engineering methodology.

Informational Documents.

  Participants System Abstracts.

       Each participant will be asked to provide a 1-2 page abstract of their
       current/proposed system and its resources.  The purpose of these
       abstracts is to provide an overview of the expertise and perspectives
       of the different participants without the need for formal
       presentations at the meeting itself.  Access information, on-line
       capabilities, data held, documentation, etc. will be included in the
       abstracts. 

       We will send to each participant an abstract layout that they must
       use when submitting their system description. From this layout we
       will produce a table listing the different types of data to which all
       of these systems provide access. This table may be augmented with
       data types we feel are highly desirable but which are not currently
       accessible using the systems represented in the abstracts.

  Systems and Protocol Overview.

       A number of different client-server systems (JGOFS, EOSDIS, World Wide
       Web (WWW)) and object protocols (DFONET, EOSDIS/IMS, JGOFS, WWW
       Hypertext Transport Protocol (HTTP)) will be reviewed and an overview
       of their commonalities and differences given.  This document would be
       helpful in terms of giving structure to the discussions on
       client-server systems and protocols and the different approaches that 
       are currently being taken.  The document will serve to highlight the 
       functionality and flexibility of the client-server model through 
       concrete examples of implementations relevant to scientific data
       systems. 

       It will be useful to look at the systems and then view their
       application level communication protocols so that people can get more
       of a handle on how protocol differences translate to characteristics
       of a system. We will also provide an overview of the architectures
       that these systems embody as well as a table comparing their features.

       When addressing WWW, I think the core topic becomes HTML (Hypertext
       Markup Language). EOSDIS and JGOFS are conventional (?) client-server
       systems while WWW is a hypertext system. One way to look at the
       difference is that HTML is a kind of programming language. Documents
       that use HTML become part of a large (and ``infinitely extensible'')
       finite state machine with each hypertext reference representing one
       transition of the machine. Conventional client-server systems 
       can also be viewed as FSMs, but their protocol defines the number of
       states of the total system.  

       Interestingly, JGOFS is really halfway between EOSDIS (conventional 
       client-server) and WWW (hypertext reference) since it allows individual
       server sites to add to the set of methods (many-to-many). Once another
       server knows that these methods exist, it can use then via the
       protocol. In this sense, JGOFS protocol is also infinitely extensible,
       but in a geometrically different way. Its methods can span many nodes,
       but the data objects cannot (many-to-one). 

  I see the development of these documents as a way of providing a structure
  and point of departure for the discussions that will take place at the
  meeting.  They will also provide a common reference for the participants,
  who will have a rather wide ranging level of expertise but differing
  amounts of overlapping knowledge.

