APPENDIX II





Meeting Minutes



National Oceanographic Partnership Program 
and 
Distributed Oceanographic Data System

Technical Interchange Meeting with
Environmental Systems Research Institute










November 7 & 8, 2000
Environmental Systems Research Institute
New York Street
Redlands CA





Attendees



ESRI

Richard Lawrence 	rlawrence@esri.com		909-793-2853 x 1700
Jeanne Rebstock	jrebstock@esri.com		909-793-2853 x 1160
Simon Evans		sevans@esri.com		909-793-2853 x 2380
Neil Millett 		nmillet@esri.com		909-793-2853 x 2709
Art Hadad		ahadad@esri.com		909-793-2853 x 1055
Steve Copp 		scoop@esri.com		909-793-2853 x 1480
Gene Vaatveit		gvaatveit@esri.com		909-793-2853 x 2335
Kim Burns 		kburns@esri.com		909-793-2853 x 2712


DODS

Ted Habermann 	Ted.Habermann@noaa.gov	303-497-6472
Dan Holloway 	d.holloway@gso.uri.edu	401-874-6831
Steve Hankin 		hankin@pmel.noaa.gov	206-526-6080
John Cartwright 	jcc@ngdc.noaa.gov		303-497-6284
Nathan Potter		ndp@oce.orst.edu		541-737-2293
Mark Ohrenschall 	mao@ngdc.noaa.gov		303-497-6507
Dale Kiefer 		kiefer@usc.edu		213-740-5814
Frank Obrien	 	fjobrien@home.com		714-730-6858
Chris Finch 		chris.finch@jpl.nas.gov	818-354-2390


Other
										
Len McWilliams 	len.mcwilliams@informix.com	703-847-3359
Daniel Martin 		dmartin@tpmc.com			781-544-3803




Meeting Summary


Introduction

“To facilitate data exchange technology between GIS users and scientific users.” 

DODS has been a supporting technology to scientists for several years. It has provided an 
extensible and reliable architecture to share oceanographic and atmospheric data sets of spatial 
and temporal types, using Internet connectivity, and desktop applications common to research 
scientists. DODS users recognize that a significant volume of relevant spatial data exists among 
the GIS community. Understanding how common GIS store, document, read, and distribute data 
is essential to expanding DODS functionality and providing research scientist effective and 
timely tools. DODS users also recognize that non–scientists among the GIS community could 
greatly benefit from, access to the existing and future DODS technology, data and understanding 
of ocean scientists’ needs.


Main Points

 “To identify and understand the commonalities in the technical design and development of 
ESRI products and DODS software/infrastructure.”

The DODS community and ESRI have both designed and developed information architecture for 
distributing and accessing data from multiple hosts. Technical overviews and demonstrations of 
both approaches were given. Both systems share many similarities in their overall goal of 
distributed data publishing and access. However, these systems differ considerably in their 
technical implementation. Discussion also centered on supported data types and how to handle 
the advanced types that DODS partners need using ESRI tools. The common use of XML by 
both architectures may become a very important overlap as both designs mature. Developing 
tools to enhance data transfer across between both architectures 

“To assist ESRI in understanding ocean scientist user requirements.”

ESRI has a long term business interest in continuing to expand its marine sector. Through 
periodic meetings of this type, ESRI hopes to better support their marine/scientist clients with 
expanded data models, distribution systems, and desktop tools. ESRI is also interested in 
providing meeting-planning support to their marine/scientist clients during the annual ESRI user 
conference. DODS partners gave detailed presentations and demonstrations of existing DODS 
projects, their requirements, and the main technical hurdles that DODS developers encounter. 
ESRI developers were especially interested in how ocean scientists used and modeled volume 
data types.



“To assist DODS designers and developers in understanding current GIS technology.”

Senior software developers from ESRI’s ArcIMS, SDE and Metadata groups provided detailed 
technical overviews and answered questions from DODS developers. Demonstrations of all of 
ESRI’s major tools were provided. New ESRI software that is still in development was also 
discussed. Topic areas that frequently came up included storage of grid and volume data types, 
ESRI client needs when conducting data discovery, and the mechanics of extending ArcIMS 
with a DODS “connector”. DODS developers specially note that more technical documentation 
is needed to describe the basic file-metadata requirements that an ESRI client needs to access a 
DODS data stream in order to provide those metadata from DODS Servers.


“To lay the groundwork for year 2 and 3 of the project.”

This meeting was the first for the beginning of a three-year effort. Specific technical tasks were 
selected and discussed for development in year one. There was general discussion on how this 
meeting corresponds to other regional NOPP/DODS meetings and the national NOPP/DODS 
meeting. The outcome of these meetings as well as the results of year one development will 
likely direct year two and three plans. Project activity in year two and three will be increased.

In year one, DODS partners will build a DODS-ArcIMS connector that will provide DODS 
clients access to GIS data from an ArcIMS configuration. This will provide the background for 
DODS developers to build a mechanism that ESRI clients can use to access the DODS 
architecture in the future. DODS partners will begin working with the ArcIMS SDK to develop a 
connectivity mechanism for GIS clients to DODS servers.


General Observations

ESRI decided not to support the Z39.50 protocol for metadata. Metadata will be stored in an 
XML format within an RDBMS/SDE and will be accessible through full text searches submitted 
using ArcCatalog and published with ArcIMS.

The Geo-statistical Analyst has great potential for scientific use. When it can point to a data 
source located on a RDBMS/SDE its utility will be even more significant.


ESRI has a custom utility for loading grids into an RDBMS/SDE, however there are some 
combinations of RDBMS/SDE and ArcIMS that currently do not work together.

ArcIMS has some basic data access problems with heterogeneous network environments. These 
may be solved if the industry problems with the UFS are resolved. 

ESRI does not have a data type for volume or time-series data, however they are interested in 
building a capability to work with these data types.

XML is a fundamental part to data communication for ESRI web applications and may be part of 
the next major change in the design of DODS.

ArcIMS is extensible using standard languages such as C++ and JAVA. JAVA Beans will be 
provided that will be able to wrap COM based extensions.

Informix and DB2 have a more object oriented design to their spatial component compared to 
SDE on those RDBM’s, and has therefore a thinner layer.



Select HTTP References

NOPP	http://core.cast.msstate.edu/NOPPpg1.html
DODS Home	http://www.unidata.ucar.edu/packages/dods/
LAS presentation	http://shark.pmel.noaa.gov/~hankin/ESRI/
NOPP Proposal	http://www.unidata.ucar.edu/
	packages/dods/archive/proposals/nopp-html/nopp.html
ESRI User Conference	http://www.esri.com/events/uc/index.html
Open GIS Consortium	http://www.opengis.org/
NVDS	http://nndc.noaa.gov/?home.shtml
NNDC	http://nndc.noaa.gov/?http://ols.nndc.noaa.gov/ 
plolstore/plsql/olstore.main?look=1
PMEL	http://www.pmel.noaa.gov/
SDE License status 	http://dev.ngdc.nndc.noaa.gov/cgi-bin/wt/nndcp/ShowDatasets? 
query=&dataset=400029&search_look=1&group_id=14&display_
look=1
Newport Surf Report	http://nwprtsrf.oce.orst.edu:8080/nwprtsrf/surf.html
NNDC Developer	http://dev.ngdc.nndc.noaa.gov/cgi-bin/wt/nndcp/Devel_Site_Map



Table of Acronyms

API		Application Programming Interface
ArcIMS	Arc Internet Map Server
AXL		Arc eXtensible Markup Language
CDC		Climate Data Center
COM		Common Object Model
DODS		Distributed Oceanographic Data System
ESRI		Environmental System Research Institute
FGDC		Federal Geographic Data Committee
GML		Geography Markup Language
GN		Geography Network
GUI		Graphic User Interface
HDF		Hierarchical Data Format
IDL		Interactive Data Language
JDBC		JAVA Database Connection
JSP		JAVA Server Pages
LAS		Live Access Server
MEL		Master Environmental Library
MrSID		Multi Resolution Seamless Image Database
NCEP		National Center for Environmental Prediction
NNDC		NOAA National Data Centers
NOPP		National Oceanographic Partnership Program
ODBC		Open Database Connectivity
OGC		Open GIS Consortium
PMEL		Pacific Marine Environmental Laboratories
SDE		Spatial Database Engine
SDK		Software Development Kit
SVF		Single Variable Format
TEDS		Tactical Environmental Decision Support System
UNEP		Unite Nations Environmental Program
UFS		Universal File System
VPF		Vector Product Format
WAP		Wireless Access Protocol
WMS		Web Map Server(OGC interface specification)
WMT		Web Mapping Testbed
XML		eXtensible Markup Language


November 7


Introduction by Richard Lawrence

Meeting goals
	Forum for DODS
	Discuss and form vision
	Technical overview
	Discuss commonalities

Meeting introductions
Richard Lawrence	ESRI		Professional Services
Jeanne Rebstock	ESRI		Environmental Solutions Manager
Simon Evans		ESRI		Professional Services, Marine Industry
Neil Millett		ESRI		Professional Services
Art Hadad		ESRI		Development Manager (ArcIMS)
Steve Copp		ESRI		Software Development (SDE)
Gene Vaatveit		ESRI		Software Development (Metadata)
Kim Burns		ESRI		Geography Network representative
Ted Habermann	NOAA		Principle Investigator 
Dan Holloway		URI		Data site population, user interface and server
Dale Kiefer		USC
Nathan Potter		ORST		DODS developer, JAVA, SQL Server
Frank Obrien
Chris Finch		JPL		Data provider, HDF Server and PC port of DODS
Len McWilliams	Informix	Geospatial solutions to Informix and Internet applications
Mark Ohrenschall	NOAA		Programming Freeform and DODS servers, SDE 
applications and simple data type support.
Steve Hankin		NOAA PMEL Ocean scientist requirements, early in DODS, original LAS 
John Cartwright	NOAA		ARCIMS and JAVA servlett
Frank Obrien		USC		wants to extract data, serve to DODS, has proposal to NRL
Daniel Martin		CSC/TPMC	Meeting minutes

Jeane Rebstock comments
? Provides high level support to the ocean industries.
? ESRI wants to grow ocean industry business.
? ESRI wants to understand user needs.
? Mentioned that NRL is interested in DODS/NOPP.


DODS Overview and Ocean Science User Requirements with Dan 
Holloway 

(for complete presentation see http://www.unidata.ucar.edu/packages/dods/ )
 
? NOPP Virtual Ocean Data Hub Project
? 50 participants
? 4 regional coordinators:
Texas A&M
NOAA CSC
State of Maine
Oregon State University

? DODS is an architecture to subset, acquire and ingest data.
? To enhance sharing.
? To use client tools to facilitate - Directory, Inventory and Data components.
? High functionality for data access.
? Primary DODS development is on data and not on directory support.
? DODS constraints:
No reformatting of data.
Function with minimum metadata.
Easy to interface with existing systems.
Must contain essential metadata to function.

? Explanation of a typical URL - can be difficult to write, this may be a barrier.
? DODS has several interfaces (command line, URL builder and GUI).
? Describe a matrix of interfaces and client applications and their status and pros/cons.
? 1 Terabyte of data, 300 data sets, 15 sites globally.
? IDL, Excel and Web browser are the primary clients.
? Now porting to JAVA, the JDBC based SQL server is now available for downloading.
? Specialized servers have been written for different data sets.
? DOS Data Model and constraints.
? DODS Data Objects (DDS, DAS, Data).
? Brief open discussion to reintroduce DODS at a high level.










RDBMS Talk with Len McWilliams

? Brief discussion on the benefits of using a relational database.
? Informix has incorporated SDE functionality and especially projection capabilities into 
the core Informix spatial components.
? DataBlade is customizable and written in C.
? New extensions can be written.
? TEDS project is involved with grid data.
? There are geodetic extensions.
? ESRI and Informix have a joint effort underway.
? The blobs that contain spatial information in the RDBMS are in a ESRI format.
? 
	OGC Comments

? All functions are OGC compliant.
? OGC has a standard request format.
? ESRI has an OGC listener/connector that monitors a specific port.
? The listener converts OGC to an AXL request to forward.
? OGC specifications and ESRI/Informix collaboration.
? ESRI connections use XML/HTTP to web applications and Socket type to Databases.
? OGC Web Mapping Testbed 2 is still working and in specification mode.
? David Beddoe was the ESRI contact for the technical subcommittee.
? Conducting testing of WMTB2 with ArcIMS.
? FGDC funded a broad partnership between NGDC and NOAA’s Climate Diagnostic 
Center to test WMTB2. NOPP is involved in testing those standards through NGDC. 
? WMTB2 is important to NOPP.

	NOPP Meeting

? NOPP user meetings are crucial to understand user needs.
? These meeting minutes will be incorporated into the regional meeting summary.
? Are existing NOPP/DODS tools available to current users in need?
? Overview of the 4 regional meetings underway.
? NRL is considering a catalog engine using MEL in the development of DEI system.
? Steve Hankin on board of national meeting, this will occur around March-May, no 
location yet.
? ESRI is interested in attending and is on the invite list.
? The regional meetings are primarily for data providers.
? General discussion on the fate of FGDC if all federal executive orders were rescinded.





User Requirements and Live Access Server with Steve Hankin

(for full text see http://shark.pmel.noaa.gov/~hankin/ESRI/)

? TMAP, Thermal Model Analysis Program.
? Lots of software development.
? Modelers rarely collaborate/connect with others and generate large volumes of data.
? Focus on current efforts is to build a collaborative system.
? Bulk of new/needed data access methods are for research purposes.
? In situ, Satellite, Models, Moorings, Cruises, Drifters, Coastal.
? Data management is not fully developed for drifters.
? Plans are to have 3000 active in 6-7 years between surface and 2000m.
? Other data types include multibeam sonar and ROV based video, samples and still 
imagery.
? Jeanne mentioned that the spottiness of oceanographic data is a major problem, and that a 
new ESRI tool called the Geo-statistical Analyst Extension may be of interest.
? Steve - 3D renditions/models of data, especially over time is essential to chemical 
oceanography applications.
? Present ESRI strategy for grid data seems to be image based.
? An ESRI staff person will talk later about using grid data with SDE, this is important.
? Some researchers prefer grid data to limit the volume issue.
? Level 2 data is along track data stream.
? Level 3 data is gridded, calibrated and cleaned data.
? Do users need access to original, full raw data? Or is a level 3 scientific output optimal?
? The types of users vary, there are instrument developers, modelers, educators.
? Many prefer the grid product because of convenient size.

	Open Discussion

? There are many data management issues in visualizing time series data.
? The TYROS satellites have vertical sounders that provide a rich data stream.
? Radiosome observations are a rich data source with a long history.
? Atmospheric and oceanographic research are closely tied.
? Len - Navy has a similar project - TEDS in Monterey, CA and is related the MEL (master 
environmental library).
Data collection.
Query
Integration
Access
? The Environmental Scenario Generator Project is using mySQL with the NCEP re-
analysis grids and taking over much of the TEDS work.
? TEDS/ESG are investigating Informix as a spatial solution.
? Should we be investigating expanded partnerships?
? The multi dimension aspect is crucial.
? ESRI’s goal to merge the computer gaming graphics advances with data driven needs.
? Many of the animated graphics are not data driven.
? Mark Abbot at Oregon State is a contact for DODS.
? Dawn Wright at Oregon is using ArcIMS with Tiffany Vance at PME.
? ESRI has worked with users collecting multibeam sonar data.
? Discussion on how we work in true 3D, many move data to IDL.
? What about commercial efforts?
? SAIC (Science International Corporation) is a commercial NOPP partner and are also 
involved in the Environmental Scenario Generator Project.
? Gulf of Mexico has large data sets in the Deepstar Program, maybe propriety but are 
working with DODS as a data provider.
? Oil and gas industry has heavy data applications in the ROV business/annual inspection.


Live Access Server Demonstration

? A web GUI for data sets in formats supported by DODS.
? Java map based with server side graphics.
? Multiple back-end DODS applications doing the work.
? Easy to set up.
? Streamed data as text or bitmap image capability.
? Several different views including X,Y,Z and time were rendered to a browser
	pan/zoom functions.
? There are a variety of output types such as comma delimited, NetCDF.
? DODS has a requirement to provide data to GIS users.
? DODS doesn’t want to require the user to have a license.
? Wants to support typical GIS layer types.
? Ended up choosing the (SVF) Single Variable Format - ArcView grid.
? Unfortunately, there is no metadata associated with this format.

	Open Discussion

? Lack of float type support in the ESRI data model is a real issue with scientific grid data.
? Float types require a pallette object for display.
? Perhaps a modified WRLD file could help give ArcView access to NetCDF and to other 
science formats.
? Can an extension to ArcView be written for NetCDF?
? How do we get NetCDF data into 3D Analyst/Spatial Analyst?
? Maybe the world file could direct a skip operation to the right location in NetCDF.
? The large audience of ArcView users and tools warrants a work around for NetCDF.
? HDF allows redirection/linking of header file to a data file, like the WRLD file config.
? Maybe this could be wrapped in XML.
? NCSA folks recast their data from float to integer.
? People do not want intermediate file formats.
? Maybe a quick solution could be built even if it is not the end all in design.
? There are a lot of float data archives out there.
? New ESRI products will have float capability for grids.

	Return to LAS Demonstration

? No temporary files are written.
? Will performance become an issue?
? It is designed for the extraction of modest slices of data.
? DODS compresses the data stream.
? DODS is an open distributed system for moving data, mirroring can be used.
? Load balancing can be configured.
? Choking of data requests can be delt with incrementally, it is not an issue now.
? Use standard HTML over HTTP, so firewalls are not a problem.
? JSP is used to render as a servlett.
? Using JSP the performance hit is on startup/compile of the servlett.
? After servlett startup it is in process server.
? Connection to the core is with a Bean.
? A NY site has it own data format and customized server, the data can be accessed using 
DODS.
? A database of base URLs are stored on the LAS.
? How does an application connect to DODS?
? The request and response process is described in detail.

	Open Discussion

? The architecture is similar to the ESRI model and to a data blade.
? IDL and MatLab do not have client libraries.
? There is a JAVA API for NetCDF.
? A remote RDBMS could also be connected.
? Can we identify a group of commonalities?
? AXL to DAD.
? The binary data stream may be hard to work with.
? Maybe integration is best done as two separate components.
? Need to divide the problem into the binary blobs and the metadata.
? In regards to metadata, if the AXL has the functionality for DODS communications we 
can avoid building a connector.
? DODS does not need metadata, what metadata does ESRI clients need?
? The GML and AXL is published.
? AXL contain reference to the data stream.
? Connections are made to ArcIMS with HTTP and by Sockets to RDBMS.
? Perhaps XML can be used with DODS, is it adequate for client needs?
? XML is used with and without data in ESRI products.




	Continuation of LAS Demonstration

? Multiple ways to access data from servers.
? NCEP Re-Analysis, CDC as 2.5-degree square by 6 hour samples.
? This data set is in the terabyte range.
? Project level data management is impractical.

	Open Discussion

? CDC is the partner for the wester water assessment, now has SDE for coverages.
? UNEP is building their version of a distributed server configuration with ArcIMS.
? The UNEP site likely to be very large, and needs DODS-like data and resources.
? UNEP is typically poorly funded, however Ted Turner is a major supporter of this.
? Hands on demo of LAS with Pacific cruise data, slices, graphics etc.
? DODS has a self-describing data design.
? Prototype demo for the NOPP system described.
? Sister server concept allows all to share in a collaborative setting.
? Display can show model and observation data in the same session.
? Non grid data example showing cruise based carbon measurements.
? Great care was taken to render the data as simply as possible without corruption.


General Discussion
	
	Topics or question summary from the morning session

? What protocol is used with ArcIMS, HTTP or SOCKETS?
? Are OGC Web Mapping Testbed Standards a spec yet?
? Does ArcIMS employ an OGC listener?
? To request a Geo-statistical Analyst demonstration for grid generation.
? What grid types does ArcIMS and ArcMap support and how do we avoid conversion?
? Can we point a WRLD file at a blob?
? Discuss the DODS application server diagram with Art Hadad.
? AXL specification should be given to all participants.

	What are the priority questions for the DODS - ESRI integration?
	
? How do we provide DODS data access to GIS users?
? How do we provide GIS data access to DODS users?
? Identify common issues tomorrow.
? What is minimum metadata requirement for sharing data between DODS and ESRI 
users?
? No minimum metadata requirements for DODS users.
? Metadata can be encapsulated in many different ways.
? DODS has error handling that covers basic QA/QC.
? What is the basic metadata for an ESRI client?
? Is the Marine XML standard something that should be investigated?
? Marine XML has been under construction for several years.
? Do we build a DODS connector or server application?
? Do we need the ArcIMS SDK to build a DODS connector?
? ESRI has a ArcIMS SDK that is in Beta and can be made available to Beta members.
? Maybe a DODS connector would be a good first step.
? See ArcIMS architecture design.
? Discussion of the request and response process and role of a DODS connector.
? ArcIMS SDK will not be released as a product in ArcIMS 3.1.
? Does ArcIMS provide direct SQL access to the RDBMS?
? Which side should we focus on, the connector or a spatial server?
? Brief talk about the JIVA, Joint Intelligence Visualization Application.
? JIVA began as a NIMA project with MOIMS, users wanted a vector map.
? JIVA was basically a catalog of footprints and status maps.
? JIVA was built with SDE for coverages.
? With Informix envelopes or extents are stored within the RDBMS.
? Brief talk on the USGS Geoengine.
? The differences between the Oracle and Informix database model for spatial capabilities.


ArcIMS Demonstration with Hugh Kegan

? Map services can be built on the fly.
? Geography Network overview.
Maps, data, and geo-services.
This is a catalog of catalogs.
? A map service can hit multiple data sources.
? Overview of a customized JAVA site.
? Menu expansion can be programmed.
? Extraction of data can be implemented.
? Netscape 6 should work, it has not been tested.


ArcMAP Demonstration

? Showed linking to web-based data sources at multiple sites.
? Feature service data can be saved in ArcMAP.
? Re-projection can be handled on the fly through XML.





ArcCatalog Demostration

? Goal is to be OGC compliant.
? Allows query and selection on metadata.
? Metadata is stored in either a geodatabase or in file, if shapefiles exist.
? Searches through metadata on multiple database connections can be done.


Map on Demand Demonstration

? ArcIMS forwards a coodinate to ArcMAP.
? ArcMap renders and image and forwards to ArcIMS.
? General discussion on VPF to SDE and grid input to SDE.
? Grids can be loaded into certain versions of SDE with a special ESRI provided tool.

ArcScene Demonstration

? To replace the 3D Analyst extension.
? To be released as an extension to ArcView, ArcInfo desktop in first quarter 2001.
? ArcObjects can be used to extend ArcScene.
? Flybys, visibility domes, and vertical digitizing where shown.
? Wireframe and draped surface renders.
? DXF can be read as an input type.


Spatial Analyst Demonstration

? Does not render volumes.
? Examples shown include cost surface, visibility, and mobility.
? Multiple surfaces (criteria) were used to determine least effort path.
? Paths can be restricted to a vector network, such as a road.


ArcPad Demonstration

? Pocket PC and WAP phone updates to an SDE/RDBMS in real-time.

SDE and GRID Discussion with Steve Copp 

? SDE will support floating point grids on 3.1 release.
? The term grid to ESRI means specifically the ESRI GRID format.
? The goal in Arc 8.x is to develop grid functionality regardless of grid/image format.
? Any raster format supported by ESRI can go into SDE.
? Aux files are used to store statistics on the grid data, if the native format cannot handle it.
? See ESRI object model diagram for raster data objects.
? The RDO (raster data object) uses some of the ERDAS library.
? This mechanism allows extension by building a DLL and registering it to access non-
supported image formats.
? The aux file can contain an attribute table, LUT, palettes, histograms projection 
information etc.
? The aux file is automatically built and maintained.
? ArcView and ArcInfo share the same grid compatibility in 8.1.
? RDBMS can be used to manage the raster data.
? Very large raster data sets work well in SDE/RDBMS.
? Pyramids are generated and tiles are typically 1/4 of the image size.
? Usually only a small blob is requested and can usually be passed on quickly.
? The goal is to reduce trips to database and reduce number of tiles that are returned.
? Pyramids are made only with Nearest Neighbor.
? The underlying table construction is the same across RDBMS.
? Nearest Neighbor, Bilinear and Bicubic available in Arc 8.x.
? LZ77 (PNG,ZIP) is used to compress image data.
? There is a JAVA and C API to SDE.
? All pyramids must be completely in or outside of the RDBMS.
? There is no data type for true volumes or time dependant data.
? ESRI would like to investigate multi-dimensional data types.
? ESRI would like to adopt a voxel/volumetric capability.
? For display and analysis performance ESRI envisions using true discrete frame 
techniques as a starting point.
? Each frame could be made into a pyramid.
? Discussion on the possibly of making a cube/blob as a tile.
? Informix Data Blade allows the indexed extraction from a blob.
? Discussion on performance and blob/cube requests and sub-setting.
? The TEDS program is trying to use tiles.
? ESRI true 3D development is just beginning.
? ArcIMS has specific file formats that are supported, same as ArcView 3 and MO.
? WRLD file data is handled in AXL.
? ArcIMS is needed unless access is available across TCP – LAN.
? We can’t expect a DODS provider to run ArcIMS.
? DODS delivers data right to the local application.
? Users can run functions on the server side.
? DODS doesn’t yet have a multi-user access problem.
? ArcIMS 3.1 supports re-projection of images.
? All pyramids are kept in a single table.
? Tile size and levels are tunable, but probably will not yield a huge increase in 
performance.
? ESRI has plans to make a HDF reader.
? COM tools for data loading and display is on Windows only.
? Unix clients are for access only.
? Flat binary and LZ77 are the blob formats currently supported.
? Compression is tracked through a visible flag.
? Compression really helps on machines with a fast CPU and slow disks.
? SID is lossy and must be decompressed to enter a DB.
? This combination makes little sense and is not used.
? JPEG 2000 maybe supported in SDE 8.2.
? ArcObjects gives full access to data in memory.


November 8
Why Use a Relational Database Management System
 
? Not all data need reside in the database, external data can be linked.
? An RDBMS is not always the optimum solution.
? Index capabilities are a strength.
? Rtree index method is scalable and self-balancing.
? Integration of many advanced data types.
? Relationships can be modeled.
? Performance can be enhanced through parallel architectures in scalable configurations.
? Ease of management for large data sets.
? Projection of the data can be done on the fly.
? Access to SQL queries.
? Backup, recovery, rollback, replication, transactions, multi-user, and other routine 
RDBMS functionality.
? The Informix and IBM/DB2 approach is more object based then Oracle.

	General Discussion

? How does a client make a request, and conduct discovery of a data source?
? Answer - SQL, JDBC, ODBC, ArcSDE.
? In the GEODE project (USGS) a GUI interface was developed with pre-compiled SQL 
queries.
? Queries can also be constructed on the fly through an application.
? In ArcIMS queries are made via HTTP.
? In the JAVA world the discovery mechanism is missing.
? The science data types vary and effect what is available on request.
? A published schema may be hard for a client application to process.
? GEODE had a server resource index like the ArcIMS directory list.
? DODS general overview.
	What are the interoperable issues to provide access to GIS clients.
? See S.Hankin web page for full 
text.htt://shark.omel.noaa.gov/~hankin/OCMIP/DODS/DODS.htm.
? Steve Hankin describes the mechanism to enable a DODS client using a diagram.
? A server is needed for each format of data provided.
? Format and location of data is abstracted.
? Scientist must write the read method if they are not using a supported format such as 
NetCDF, HDF or FreeForm.
? Writing a server, using FreeForm maybe a barrier for some scientist to publish data.
? Freeform data description method can help decipher many formats.
? Most scientific data is generic.
? Need to reduce the barrier to adoption of DODS, scientist, have little time to write 
servers.
? Scientists do not want to reformat data.
? A registry of servers is available.
? A web crawler is also under construction.
? Goal is....GIS client and science data.
? Goal is....GIS data and science client.


ArcIMS Discussion with Art Hadad

? We need a bi-directional mechanism for the integration of scientific and GIS data.
? We need to provide GIS users access to the Terra bytes of scientific data.
? MODIS is a new and huge data stream of hyperspectral data in the 10-100m spatial 
resolution, destined for GIS clients.
? MODIS data is in the EOSHDF.
? LIDAR is another major data source for measurement of elevation, vegetation and tree 
counts.
? How do we get a DODS server into the ArcIMS drop down list, how much metadata is 
needed for a GIS connection?
? General introduction to the ArcIMS architecture:
Presentation
Business Logic
Storage
	
	
ArcIMS Architecture Diagram

 


? Any client that can read XML can access data from ArcIMS.
? Discussed ArcIMS clients, HTML, JAVA, AEJ, ArcView, ArcMAP etc.
? The web server has several connectors, ASP, WMS 1.0, Cold Fusion etc.
? In 3.1 there is a set of JAVA Server Beans forming the applink used to write your own 
connector.
? AXL is sent to app server.
? The POST mechanism is the preferred mechanism.
? The appserver forwards AXL to the spatial server and off to storage to retrieve data.
? The manager is built with JAVA applets.
? The spatial servers are written in C++,  this is the only part left to port to Unix.
? General discussion on major ArcIMs components
? ArcIMS is being ported to Linux, SGI, AIX
? Spatial servers do the major work.
? More physical servers can be added and managed through virtual servers.
? AXL is the glue that binds the configuration to the request and response.
? The spatial server is a container.
? 5 extensions out of the box include, image, feature, query, geocode, and extract.
? Custom services can be extended.
? Multiple workspaces exist for SDE, raster....

Spatial Server Diagram

 


? Extensions to ArcIMS are very open.
? With an Image Service and simple clients, the request will return a URL of the location 
of an image.
? With an Image Service and smarter clients, the response includes the XML encoded 
binary data (GIF, JPEG, PNG).
? With an Image Service a get feature request will respond with text encoded within an 
inflated XML file.
? An Image Service is server side rendering.
? With a Feature Service the response is an inflated AXL file with embedded proprietary 
binary stream.
? Clients render in feature streamed configurations.
? The servers render in Image Server configurations.
? What do we need to know to build a DODS connector.
? It appears that a DODS connector must handle communications in both directions, from 
DODS URL to AXL and from an AXL stream output from the app server to a DODS 
stream.

	
Here are the options

? Extend the connectors.
? Add a new data source.
? Modify on the client. 




Central Cloud Diagram

 


? ESRI uses the Xercese tool to parse XML into standard usable objects.
? Thick client construction is challenging within DODS design.
? XML is the basic solution to a variety of changing problems that ESRI faces.
? What is needed to make a new data source - unpublished technology the ArcIMS SDK?
? The ArcIMS SDK will be a product no sooner then 6 months but maybe later.
? ArcIMS SDK will not have admin components for security reasons.
? ArcIMS spatial server is C++.
? ESRI has a prototype that is essentially a JAVA proxy server extension to the spatial 
servers.
? ESRI also has a prototype that allows the registration of a COM object.
? Design work for connectors will remain stable, not so on the server side – possibly.
? Getting a DOD client to talk with a ArcIMS server is recommended as a first, easiest 
step.
? The technology of the ArcIMs SDK is in flux and would effect development within the 
business logic section to ArcIMS.
? ESRI recommends development of a connector for DODS client to GIS data.
? A metadata server extension will be available on ArcIMS after ArcIMS 3.1.
? JDBC and ODBC connections to the server will be available in the future.
? Distributed GIS is the goal.
? The NOPP project has a 3-year plan. Higher funding levels are slated for year 2 and 3.
? A DODS connector.
? General agreement that in year 1 we will develop a DODS connector.
? This will also allow developers to better understand ArcIMS development and allow the 
ArcIMS SDK to stabilize.
? From the web server back the configuration works on SOCKETS.
? Discussion on the emap link.
? Discussion on the appserver link functionality for communication.
? A set of JAVA Beans will be provided for wrapping AXL to read/write Map, Layer, 
Coordinate System, and other operations
? This set of BEANS handles the SOCKET communications.
? James Gallagher is the principal developer behind DODS.
? HTTP and XML has been in the plans for the past year.
? TomCat will be fully supported in 3.1, now in Beta 2.
? The application server link is a wrapper class (JAVA Bean) to simplify development.
? More comments about COM implementation.

	First Year Goal

? DODS team evaluates the appserver link.
? Writing a DODS connector.
? We can probably create the connector with the non-ESRI funds and later use the ESRI 
funds to address the appserver work.
? Showing the new functionality of the connector will be important.
? Connectors do not communicate among one another.
? To be registered with the Geography Network, a map service or ARCIMS is not required.
? Can the GN handle legacy systems.
? Some general discussion.
? ESRI clarifies that the JAVA BEANS do not decode the feature stream class (at this 
point), only ESRI clients can decode the feature-streamed class.
? The ArcIMS SDK is available now only to Beta users.
? Query Server is necessary to get back and XML open stream.
? Beans will be in the SDK to parse feature streams.
? Discussion on the performance burdens of a query server, especially between the spatial 
server and the connector.
? Maybe a Bean could deliver a binary out to the DODS client and skip the connector.
? Discussion on the pros and cons of a feature service.
? Using scale dependency can help resolve performance problems, maybe an Image Server 
at a broad scale and Feature Server at a fine scale.
? ESRI recommends server side processing with HTTP in general.
? A query service can request against either an Image or feature service.
? Layer contents can be dynamic.
? Projections can be done on the fly, including images.
? How do we map to a DODS client?
? DODS requests are basically an SQL-like form.
? Discussion on how does the DODS client receives data to render as polygons or lines?
? The regional groups are to define some of the limitations of the DODS data model.
? NFS systems can be a problem, a mixed file system (windows/linux) can be a problem 
for multiple ArcIMS Spatial Servers, this is especially problematic with dynamic map 
services.
? Sun and Microsoft may be able to resolve their differences on the UFS.
? The GN uses 20 Map Servers, 3 web servers, and 1 Oracle/SDE with maximum virtual 
servers, over a million maps per day.
? All services and data are hosted at ESRI.


NOAA NNDC Server and SDE with Ted Habermann

? Overview of NOAA Server and SDE.
? SQL functionality and potential.
? A database is built to store:
Data Info.
Data Source.
Display Look.
Search Look.
Query Look.
? A browser interface is used to manage the catalog that is housed in a RDBMS MySQL.
? Nathan wraps the JDBC request into a DODS URL.
? PERL is used within the data manager tools.
? Demonstration of the SDE license manager monitor page.
? Most of the data management difficulties are social and not technical.
? Not a lot of blob data, except satellite sources, in scientific data.
? Informix allows SQL access of RDBMS.
? Demonstration of the SPIDR2 database.
? Sara Graves is authoring the Earth Science XML schema, maybe solution for 
commonality.
? Metadata will be crucial here also.
? Search mechanisms are still unclear at this point.
? It is easy to forward and DODS URL to a SQL.
? Once data is in the NNDC it is DODS/ArcIMS accessible.


Geo-statistical Analyst Demonstration

? Variety of grid options including CoKrigging.
? Will be released in the 1st quarter.
? Chi sq. will come later, in a follow on release.
? The core utility is the visualization of the analysis and integration with spatial data 
sources.
? Processing done in existing map units.
? Examples included semi-variagram, error mapping, and clipping visual display to a 
polygon.
? Approximately 100,000 data set processed in 20 minutes.
? General discussion on the grid resolution output.
? DODS staff saw great opportunity for scientific use.
? Data sources include personal geodatabases. SDE sources in later releases.
? Open discussion on multiple topics.
? Multiple data types, contours, and grids can be incorporated.
? New shape files/geo-databases can be output.
? Ted discussed ArcIMS and SDE license changes.
? The database approach is expanding.
? The SDE component to Informix enhanced performances through load balancing.
? SDE is similar to a driver.


Geography Network Presentation

? Includes publishers - government and non-profits who do not charge for data.
? Partners - commercial units typically selling a service or data.
? A collaborative to publish and share data and services, especially live data.
? A type of marketplace.
? Search capabilities of catalogs.
? The all publisher list represents the ArcIMS sites.
? Contains 4 geoservices, such as a geocoder.
? 187 clearinghouses
? Also contains “solutions” which are interactive ArcIMS sites.
? Description of the registration process.
? Some discussion about whether a non-ArcIMS site can provide a data stream.
? ESRI will adopt the new international metadata standard.
? ESRI developing a new tool to extract necessary metadata from a registrant site.
? Exposure is a benefit to providers.
? It is unclear if a non-ESRI map service could actively participate delivering data.
? The GN has a fixed user interface.
? ESRI is looking for 24X7 participants with data sources or services of national interest.
? This is an ArcIMS site currently using a single SDE/RDBMS sources hosted by ESRI.
? There is no specific QA/QC element or review of the sources or services.
? Map services include Web Map Server (WMS) and AXL designed sites.
? ESRI clients cannot access WMS services.
? Guided tour of several GN pages.
? There are redundant system components.
? The GN hub submits an AXL request to the remote provider.
? Password protection is an option.
? Gateway sites like Texas exist, private GN’s are a possibility also.
? Custom provider applications can be hosted.
? ESRI recommends an ArcIMS or WMS as the best mechanism to participate in the GN.
? NOAA “Lights at Night” maybe a good map service to publish.
? Published services access TIFF, JPEG, MrSID and standard ArcIMS readable formats.
? MrSID performance isn’t optimum.
? ESRI has resampled and made pyramid data sets with scale dependencies to increase 
performance.


Metadata Discussion with Gene Vaatveit

? ESRI does not currently support a search using the Z39.50 protocol.
? Metadata searches are to query local or ArcIMS sources.
? ArcIMS metadata server should be released in 3.2 and runs with XML.
? This sits on top of SDE/RDBMS.
? ESRI has discussed development with BlueAngle, doesn’t look likely.
? Currently metadata is either stored on disk or in an RDBMS.
? ArcIMS will contain a metadata extension that queries an SDE/RDBMS configuration.
? ESRI has developed its own database design for metadata storage.
? The ESRI design is more text-based, somewhat like Yahoo or generic document system.
? Metadata can be stored separate from the data, and is not mandatory.
? Searches can be full text or field based.
? There is no enforcement of mandatory tags.
? ESRI has made a prototype that works with Blue Angle.
? Z39.50 sites work poorly in firewall configurations, they do not cross on port 80.
? BlueAngle would be very expensive to re-package within the standard ESRI catalog.
? There has been talk about wrapping a Z39.50 request in XML.
? The OGC catalog service is a wrapper on Z39.50.
? Isite is the server search component.
? XML has some distinctive advantages, flexibility, open.
? Full text searches of a RDBMS can be problematic, ESRI does not yet utilize the specific 
tools that each RDBMS vendor has to enhance this function.
? ESRI is seeking a common solution not tied to a particular RDBMS.
? Perhaps a new release of SDE will have more advanced text search capabilities.
? Public classes exist for read/write of shapefiles.
? Shapefile weakness is that it is defined with dbf and field names are restricted to 8 
characters.
? How do we make the scientific data available to the GIS users?
? Mark Ohrenschall is writing a translator for shapefiles.


	
Open Discussion and Recap of Issues

? A WMS will not show as a ArcIMS service or layer to an ESRI client.
? The Geo-statistical Analyst will not read data from SDE in release 1.
? The Geo-statistical Analyst looks very interesting for research purposes.
? First step is to build a DODS connector, probably with existing resources.
? 15K is available for consulting.
? March/April is the national meeting.
? Lets get the beta 3.1 ArcIMS to start investigating.
? General discussion on experienced DODS participants.
? Peter Cornillon is the primary scientist behind this.
? James Gallagher is the chief architect of DODS.
? OSU is the source of the newer SQL activities.
? The MATLAB and IDL component are mostly out of the Northeast.
? NOPP and DODS relationship discussion.
? Ted is leading the policy/coordinating effort.
? Scientific data to GIS clients is Peter’s priority.
? DODS reflects a broad selection of the ocean community.
? Lets get the AXL specifications out to the mailing list.
? Do we have any design specifications for the DODS connector?
? The development path design will be ad hoc.
? We’d like to work on the integration of the DODS SQL server and SDE.
? Informix may be the preferred platform for working with the scientific spatial data.
? How do we get grids into the Geo-statistical Layer?
? There is no volumetric data type within the ESRI domain.
? The new 3D Analyst Extension is a 2.5 D application.
? How can we continue dialog with the marine user representation with ESRI?
? Simon and Richard are the lead ESRI contacts.
? ESRI would like to develop formal user requirement profiles for marine users.
? ESRI will have a marine track at the user conference.
? Ted will be submitting a NOPP paper to the ESRI user meeting.
? Simon may be able to help coordinate a 10-15 person meeting that overlaps with the user 
conference.
? DODS and NOPP interests may be broader then usual ESRI centric to be hosted within 
the user conference.
? The group would probably be smaller then this workgroup.
? Will need the ArcIMS SDK to work with the feature streaming capability.
? How do we transition from the connector that supports DODS clients to GIS data?
? It is still unclear how the connector can or can’t support development of GIS client 
connection to DODS data sources/servers.
? Continue talks with Informix.
? Document user profile access to ESRI dev.
? User conference may be a good opportunity to show a new capability of DODS.
? Coordinate IMS SDK.
? Organize a list of data.
? If ESRI supported WMS, DODS could publish to GN.
? There is a capability of publishing WMT from DODS, the (WMT-DODS gateway) with 
grid data only.
? This is a prototype on WMT1.0.
? A WMT2 is under construction but unavailable.
? We should take a look at the technical specification of the Monterey grid work (TEDS).






3

Technology Planning & Management Corp. 				      National Oceanographic Partnership Program
Scituate Massachusetts 02066					             Distributed Oceanographic Data Systems
									Technical Interchange Meeting at ESRI


10

Technology Planning & Management Corporation 		National Oceanographic Partnership Program   
Scituate, MA  02066		Distributed Oceanographic Data Systems
	Technical Interchange Meeting at ESRI



1

Technology Planning & Management Corp. 				      National Oceanographic Partnership Program
Scituate Massachusetts 02066					             Distributed Oceanographic Data Systems
									Technical Interchange Meeting at ESRI

