APPENDIX I			Gulf of Mexico Regional Workshop
on an Integrated Data System for Oceanography

31 October - 2 November 2000
Stennis, MS

Meeting Report

Introductions and Background

The workshop was called to order at 0910 on 31 October 2000, by W. Nowlin. Provisional 
agendas and participant lists were distributed. The agenda is given in Appendix 1. Each attendee 
gave a self-introduction. Attendees and affiliations are given in Appendix 2. 

Nowlin gave an overview of the Virtual Ocean Data System Hub project funded by the National 
Oceanographic Partnership Program (NOPP). This presentation, given in Appendix 3, included:
(1) The overall goal of the project and specific research objectives identified in the NOPP Broad 
Area Announcement to which the project was a response; 
(2) The organizational structure of the project;
(3) The phases of the program;
(4) Issues to be considered at regional workshops;
(5) The objective, approach, timing, and participants for the national workshop; and 
(6) An outline of the implementation expected to emerge and guide the out year proposal. 

The Distributed Oceanographic Data System

D. Holloway (University of Rhode Island) gave a presentation describing the Distributed 
Oceanographic Data System (DODS), including real time demonstrations of DODS capabilities 
using the Internet. This presentation is summarized in Appendix 4. Included were discussions of
	What is DODS?
	Interoperability and metadata
	What is required to serve data via DODS-enabled servers?
	What is required to locate and access data?
	DODS and web browsers
	DODS-aware applications (MATLAB, Excel, IDL,..)
	What types of data can/cannot be served?
	Future of DODS applications/servers
This session continued through the morning of the first day with many questions and comments.

Several general points of agreement emerged from this session. DODS is principally a bottom up 
data system allowing the user easy data access from within his application provided the data are 
on a DODS server and the user has knowledge of the URL for the data. DODS does not provide 
a data catalog; that will be a necessary part of the regional and national data systems. Not all 
users have need for DODS. As examples, modelers do not normally work in a DODS-enabled 
application, and many analysts prefer to examine the data and metadata carefully prior to its use 
in an application. However, DODS can be a very useful element of the required regional and 
national data models. DODS service of data is to be encouraged, but should not be mandatory.

Another key point of agreement is the necessity for data originators to freely share data if they 
are to be part of an observing system, regional, national or international. The tendency of 
oceanographers to treat data as proprietary should cease. 

A third point on which there is general agreement is the need for adequate metadata to 
accompany the data sets. It is particularly important to have adequate use metadata, and to 
maintain quality flags as are available. This point was revisited later in the workshop.

Presentations Regarding Regional Data and Products

Representatives of each participating regional institution were offered time to make a 
presentation regarding data holdings, ongoing and planned observational programs, and models. 
It was suggested that each presenter include indications of data sets that they would be willing to 
share, whether they could be served via a DODS server, and data sets they would like to receive. 
Presentations continued during the afternoon of day one and the morning of the second day. 
Considerable discussion ensued as part of the presentations, which are summarized as 
Appendices 5-19. Presentations were made by:
John Blaha (NAVOCEANO) speaking on the Northern Gulf Littoral Initiative
John Lever (NAVOCEANO) speaking on the willingness of NAVOCEANO to provide 24 hr 
by 7 d server capability for U.S. ocean data
J. J. O'Brien (FSU, COAPS) speaking on SEVEER, SeaWinds from QuickScat, and the 
NCOM under development for the Gulf of Mexico
Nan Walker (LSU Coastal Studies Institute) speaking on real time and archived data from 
the Earth Scan Laboratory and CSI, BAYWATCH, and WAVCIS
Frank Muller-Karger and Doug Myhre (USF) speaking on fields from SeaWifs and AVHRR 
satellite data now being served by USF
George Ioup (U. New Orleans) speaking on data sets from Lake Ponchartrain, Barataria 
Basin, and other littoral waters that could be made available
Jim Corbin (MSU Engineering Research Center) speaking on the Distributed Marine 
Environmental Forecasting System 
Worth Nowlin (TAMU) speaking on data holdings and ongoing projects of Texas A&M 
University
Norman Guinasso (TAMU, but representing the TX General Land Office) speaking on the 
Texas Automated Buoy Project
Ruben Solis (Texas Water Development Board) speaking on hydrological and environmental 
data being monitored in Texas and on models of Texas estuaries run by his agency
Patrick Michaud (TAMU Corpus Christi) speaking on the TCOON and on present and 
planned CODAR observations along the coastal Gulf
Mark Luther (USF) speaking on the Coastal Ocean Monitoring and Prediction System on the 
Florida shelf, including the Tampa PORTS, and developments of the USF Center for 
Ocean Technology Development
Robert Molinari (NOAA/AOML) speaking on archived ocean station, ship-of-opportunity, 
and drifter data that could be made available, the real time and delay mode data from 
the NOAA GOOS center, and the Florida Bay project
Tony Amos (Univ. of Texas Marine Science Center) speaking on the many long-term, 
multidisciplinary data sets available from the Institute and of his real time data and 
tidal predictions
Susan Starke (NOAA Coastal Data Development Center) speaking on plans of the center to 
facilitate access to "coastal" data, from the EEZ to 300-km inland. She gave a brief 
overview of Data Exchange Interfaces, a middleware under development for Navy and 
intended for use by the Center.
Richard Campanella (Tulane Univ.) speaking on the Long-term Ecosystem Assessment 
Group

Table 1 indicates the various data sets offered by the presenters for sharing. The descriptions are 
necessarily brief (perhaps schematic in some cases).  These data sets will be more fully 
described on a web site to be maintained by TAMU for reference of all interested users of 
regional data sets from the Gulf of Mexico. Tentative commitments were made toward the end 
of the workshop to which of these data sets would be served initially, by what time and whether 
it seemed likely that they would be offered via a DODS server. That information also is 
indicated in Table 1 and will be available on the TAMU web site.

General Issues for DODS Regional Workshops

The workshop was asked to consider five general issues. That was done.

1. Is the DODS data model adequate for data sets to be served in the region? What additions are 
required?
2. What are important interface issues for regional users? From data discovery to use?

Key to any successful data and product exchange system is the willingness of data originators to 
openly share data in a timely manner. Participants in the distributed data system for the Gulf of 
Mexico region must be willing to do so.

It was agreed that DODS is useful as one basis for data sharing in a distributed mode. Of course, 
it is very useful for users wishing to operate within DODS-enabled application software. 
However, it is not adequate, or intended, for all regional needs:
  •  Data location is essential (catalogs are needed);
  •  Many clients use applications not supported by DODS;
  •  Large archives now serving data need not necessarily change to DODS mode;
  •  Distribution of data and products in real time to users (especially public) may be best done 
via other methods.

Encouragement of new data servers to use the DODS mode is very desirable and will enhance 
data utilization by many users. It was agreed that Gulf of Mexico regional data providers/users 
would serve data via DODS servers as feasible. For some applications this will not be the most 
expeditious or logical method. Open exchange of data and products via the Internet is the desired 
outcome. 

Preparation and maintenance of a catalog of information now on DODS servers, as well as on 
other servers of ocean data, in the region is one essential initial step. (See issue number 5 below.)

A concern expressed by workshop participants was the need for a continuing archive for data 
and product sets considered being of long-term value. Many such sets are compiled by individual 
researchers and on their retirement or death may no longer be accessible. NAVOCEANO is 
providing a server for non-classified ocean data. It will be available for national as well regional 
use. In cases where data sets are used frequently, and especially if they are large, they can reside 
at NAVOCEANO. 

The need to preserve real-time data streams as time series was stressed. Real-time data streams 
should be further quality controlled in delayed mode and aggregated to produce as complete 
series of quality data as possible. This is already the situation for many data sets (e.g., drifter, 
ship-of-opportunity, and Argo data).

DODS offers password protection. However, it was agreed that data confidentiality will be up to 
the data provider who serves the data. 

3. What types of semantic metadata will be required? (Focus of search and use metadata.) What 
standards will be used?

The workshop considered what metadata of this type will be required. It was agreed that at a 
minimum the following information must be included:
Where do the data reside?
4-D location information,
Definitions of parameters,
Units (including standards where appropriate),
Accuracy and precision (as available), and
Flags from originators and secondary reviewers.

Very desirable additional information that should be included includes:
Methods,
Platform,
Instrument type, model, band,
Calibration data, and
Reference to algorithms used.

Other useful metadata that is recommended includes:
Supporting descriptions,
Data originator and contact information,
Source of funding for data collection, and
Reports in which data are included.

In discussing desirable formats for metadata, consideration was given to the desirability of 
having some degree of uniformity and the fact that data served by federal servers must use a 
standard format for metadata. It was agreed to adopt for the region FGDC. The amount of 
metadata required by FGDC is actually less than agreed necessary by the workshop. Moreover, 
there appear to be software packages to assist the data originator in preparing metadata in FGDC 
format.

4. What data sets will be served initially as part of this effort in order to seed the system? What 
assistance is needed?

The representatives present were queried as to what data sets they would agree to serve initially, 
by when would the initial data sets be served, whether they would enable a DODS server, and 
whether they would require assistance to do so.

Shown in Table 1 are the institutes holding Gulf of Mexico data and product sets they are willing 
to share. As indicated some already are served via web sites. Those marked with the priority 
"initial" will be served first, by the dates shown and by DODS server if so indicated.

This represents a significant commitment to the establishment of a Gulf of Mexico regional data 
system, the first step toward a model-based Gulf observing system.

5. Is a regional node needed for coordination, including data location, reference for user support, 
etc.?

A number of activities were recognized as necessary first steps in the implementation of a Gulf 
of Mexico regional ocean data system as part of a national system.

•  COAPS at FSU agreed to set up and maintain a list serve to enable ease of communication 
among regional participants. 

•  NAVOCEANO will procure and maintain a server for distribution of non-classified ocean 
data, model output, and products via the Internet.

•  TAMU will set up and maintain a web site indicating data, model output and products that 
participants are prepared to serve. It will include links to web sites where data are now 
being served. It will include a catalog of regional data on DODS-enabled servers.

• The formation of several ad hoc groups was agreed to.

	1. A working group on bathymetry and coastlines with the objective of specifying the best 
currently available data sets for bathymetry and coastline locations for the Gulf of Mexico. 
Membership will include representatives from COAPS, TAMU (Wm. Bryant's group), 
NGDC, and NAVOCEANO. (Bryant to chair?)

	2. A working group to consider and recommend the best approach to serving all real time 
data now being collected for the Gulf by non-federal institutions. This method should allow 
a user access to the intersection of the data sets. If possible it should be accessible through a 
DODS server. Membership will include representatives of TCOON, TABS, COMPS, 
WAVCIS, Florida Bay, NAVOCEANO, BAYWATCH, and URI (Dan Holloway).  
(Michaud to chair?)

	3. An ad hoc group to consider research needed to evaluate regional satellite and model-
derived data fields produced by more than one organization, with a view to identifying 
characteristics and recommending specific fields for use. Such fields include SST, color, 
wind, and sea surface height. Membership was not determined, but O'Brien might be willing 
to chair.

Other General Considerations

It was hoped that industry participants could be entrained into the system. As an example of the 
potential information that might be shared, Nowlin reviewed data sets and model output held by 
the oil and gas producers joint industry projects EJIP and CASE. This includes current meter 
time series, CODAR data, synoptic oceanographic survey data, rather fine resolution circulation 
model output, and atmospheric storm data and analyses.

It was agreed that Nowlin would send to the workshop participants a copy of the project budget 
as submitted to NOPP. Those budgets for years after the initial planning year were purposely 
vague. The reason for distribution is to allow regional participants a say in determining priorities 
for items to be included in out-year budget requests.

To increase basic data coverage in the Gulf, it was considered desirable that provisions be made 
for increasing ship-of-opportunity data from both commercial and research vessels regularly 
traversing this area. It was suggested that such vessels might be equipped with XBT launchers, 
ADCPs, and Improved Meteorological (IMET) packages.

It was generally agreed desirable to include representatives of Cuban and Mexican institutions in 
this Gulf of Mexico regional data center.

Table 1. Institutes holding Gulf of Mexico data sets they are willing to share. Some are now 
available via web site as indicated. Those marked as initial priority will be served first, by dates 
shown and by DODS server if so indicated.

Institution  Data                          Priority   Date of   DODS
             or Program                               service

NOAA/AOML    Florida Bay project            initial     3/01      yes,
             Data from NOAA GOOS Center,                        willing
               available now by web site                        depends on $

             Archived drifter and station 
               data, available on request

FSU          SeaWinds from QuickScat:       initial     02/01     yes
               operational and research 
               products available via web 
               site;
             6-hr winds at 0.5 degree 
               resolution from July 1999
             NCOM for northern Gulf

LSU          WAVCIS                                               perhaps
             Earth Scan Lab archived and 
               real time data: 
               AVHRR images for LATEX       initial      03/01     yes
                 period
               CSI archived data                         ?        yes
               BAYWATCH program                          ?        yes
               LATEX B data                              ?        yes

MSU          Offer computational power      initial                yes
             DODS server
             Investigate link to MEL 
               for service

NDBC         Buoy data, available now       initial                yes,
               via web site                                       if support
                                                                  available

NAVO         New server for U.S. data sets  initial      procure   yes
             Selected archived data sets:
	       Gridded global DBDBV         initial      03/01     yes
                 bathymetry
	       Gridded global T-S data 
                 base
             Selected operational products: 
	       MODIS fields for Gulf        initial      03/01     yes
	       COAMP for Amer. Med.         initial      03/01     yes
	       Global SST                   initial        ?        ?
             Selected 3-dimensional POM     initial      03/01     yes
               output
             Selected data from Northern    initial      03/01     yes
               Gulf of Mexico Littoral 
               Initiative

TAMU         LATEX A data                   initial      03/01     yes
             Historical daily river         initial      03/01     yes
               discharge from major U.S. 
               rivers
             Analyzed wind fields for       second
               LATEX period
             LATEX C data                   second
             NEGOM data
             Historical archives of MBT,    second
               XBT, ocean station, drifter, 
               moored current meter, and 
               ADCP data
             MAMES I & III; CHEMO I & II, 
               available now on request 
               via FTP site
             NOAA Status and Trends, 
               available now on request 
               via FTP site
             EPA EMAP data, available now 
               via web site
             National Estuarine Programs 
               data from Galveston and 
               Corpus Christi Bays

TAMU Corpus  TCOON data and products,                              perhaps
  Christi      available now via web site
             CODAR observations             initial      02-03/01  yes

Tulane

Texas General Texas Automated Buoy System   initial      03/01     yes
Land Office     data, real-time available 
                now via TAMU web site

Texas Water  TX estuarine hydro. surveys,   initial     early 01   yes
Development    1987-97, available now via 
Board          web site 
             Sonde estuarine water quality  initial     early 01   yes
               data, available  now via web 
               site 
             TX coastal hydrology records, 
               available now via web site
             Model output for TX estuaries

University   Daily fields of sea surface    initial                yes
of Colorado    height anomaly 
             Model average sea surface      initial                yes
               height for GoM

University   Lake Pontchartrain project     initial       ?        perhaps
of New       Barataria Basin project        initial      05/01     perhaps
Orleans      Coastal Data, Northern GoM     available              perhaps
             Acoustics Data, Northern GoM   initial      08/01     perhaps

University   Tampa PORTS data, available    
of South       in real time now via web 
Florida        site
             COMPS:                         intiial      03/01     yes
               archived data
             ECOHAB
             Archived satellite data        initial      03/01     yes
               (AVHRR, Sea WIFS):                                  password
               Reduced resolution AVHRR                            for
                 since 1993                                       SeaWIFS
             Current satellite data 
               streams (Sea WIFS, CZS, 
               AVHRR, MODIS)

USM          TBD

University   Archived ocean station data
of Texas     Long records of tidal height,  initial      03/01     yes
Marine         surface T & S
Science      Tidal predictions, available                03/01     yes
Institute      via web site
             Records of effects of storms                          no
               on sea level, available via 
               web site
             Marine mammal, turtle, and bird 
               stranding data


Appendix 1:	Agenda

Gulf of Mexico Regional Workshop on an Integrated Data System for Oceanography
31 October - 2 November 2000
Naval Oceanographic Office
Stennis, Mississippi
31 October 2000
Opening and welcoming remarks

Objectives of Gulf Component of an Integrated Ocean Data System
•	Enhance data set discovery, sharing, and access through the use of web-based DODS servers 
and DODS-enabled applications
•	Increase the number of Gulf of Mexico data sets available in a readily usable format
		Historical
		Real time
•	Identify suite of data types of special interest to Gulf workers
•	Foster collaborations on Gulf of Mexico region specific issues

DODS as a capability
•	Briefing and demonstration of DODS server capabilities by University of Rhode Island 
personnel
		What is DODS?
		Interoperability and metadata
		What is required to serve data?
		What is required to locate and access data?
		DODS and web browsers
		DODS-aware applications (MATLAB, Excel, IDL,..)
		What types of data can/cannot be served?
		Future of DODS applications/servers

Gulf Regional Activities—Ongoing and Planned Activities
Presentations by participants representing institutions.
•	Naval Oceanographic Office
		Northern Gulf Littoral Initiative
		Web-based server initiative
•	Florida State University
		Special Quikscatt products for the Gulf
		High-resolution Gulf model using NCOM
•	Louisiana State University
		Earth Scan Laboratory remote sensing capabilities
		WAVCIS- Wave-current surge information system
		BAYWATCH: The Vermilion-Cote Blanche Bay Physical Measurements Program
•	Mississippi State University
		Distributed Marine-Environment Forecast System
•	Texas A&M University
		MMS-sponsored activities and data archive
		Modeling activities
•	Texas General Land Office
		Texas Automated Buoy System
•	Texas Water Development Board
		Bays and Estuaries Program - data collection and dissemination
		Oil spill and other modeling activities
•	University of South Florida
		Remote sensing capabilities
		Tampa PORTS
		Coastal Ocean Measurement and Prediction System
•	AOML
•	University of South Florida
•	University of Alabama
•	Eddy Joint Industry Project
•	University of Texas, Marine Science Institute
•	TAMU Corpus Christi
•	Tulane
•	University of Southern Mississippi
•	University of New Orleans
•	Minerals Management Service
•	National Coastal Data Development Center

1 November 2000
Gulf Regional Activities (Continued)

Regional Partnerships
•	Motivation for becoming a partner
•	NOPP-DODS support for regional partners
•	Summary of datasets to be shared (which are of interest; which do you have to share?)
•	General versus region-specific datasets
	Selection of data types of special regional interest (perhaps, fresh water distributions or 
measures of hypoxia) and what metadata are needed
•	Interests in cooperative studies

DODS Questions
Having considered data sets that are available and might be served, this is an opportunity to 
return to specifics of DODS. Issues such as the following may need further consideration:
	Central/distributed servers (resources)
	Data quality control
	Metadata
	Recognition for data contributions
	Security
	Sub sampling and bandwidth for large datasets
	Catalog and data discovery
	Continued data availability

2 November 2000
Decisions regarding future activities
•	Assign DODS server installations
	Some support is available via the NOPP project.
•	Assign data sets to be served as practical demonstration of regional interest and participation
•	Regional organization needed for future development of an integrated regional-national 
international data system for oceanography
•	Needs for regional activities (e.g., web-based data information center giving pointers to data 
sets, or assistance with server installations)
•	Select representatives to national workshop

Open Discussion and Wrap up

Adjourn Meeting

Appendix 2:	Meeting Attendees and Affiliations


Tony Amos          University of Texas Marine Science Institute
Landry Bernard     NAVOCEANO
John Blaha         NAVOCEANO
Jim Bonner         TAMU-CC/TEES
Jim Braud          NAVOCEANO
Richard Campanella Tulane/Xavier Center for Bioenvironmental Research
Jim Corbin         MSU ERC/CCS
Steve Foster       MSU ERC/IDSL
Jim Fritz          TPMC
Mike Garcia        SAIC/NDBC
Norman Guinasso    GERG/Texas A&M University
Martha Head        NAVOCEANO
Dan Holloway       University of Rhode Island
Matthew Howard     Texas A&M University
Stephan Howden     University of Southern Mississippi
George Ioup        University of New Orleans, Stennis
Peter Lessing      NDBC
John Lever         NAVOCEANO
Alexis Lugo-Fernandez  Minerals Management Service
Mark Luther        University of South Florida
Melanie Magee      Gulf of Mexico Program
Robert "Buzz" Martin  Texas General Land Office
Eugene Meier       Gulf of Mexico Program
Patrick Michaud    TAMU-CC/CBI
Bob Molinari       AOML/NOAA
Steven Morey       COAPS/Florida State University
Frank Muller-Karger  University of South Florida
Doug Myhre         University of Soutn Florida
Worth Nowlin       Texas A & M University - NAVOCEANO
Jim O'Brien        COAPS/Florida State University
George Rey         LEAG/CBR
Reyna Sabina       AOML/NOAA
Mitch Shank        NAVOCEANO
Ruben Solis        Texas Water Dev. Board
Susan Starke       NCDDC/NOAA
Vembu Subramanian  University of South Florida
Molly Sullivan     Tulane University
Jack Tamul         NAVOCEANO
William Teague     NRL
Nan Walker         Louisiana State University
Patti Walker       DATASTAR/NDBC


Appendix 3:	Introduction to NOPP-sponsored National Data Hub project by Worth 
Nowlin

Project Goal and Objectives

Goal

Plan and implement a "Virtual Ocean Data Hub (VODHub) system that will provide users with 
the ability to "easily access certain data types in specified locations/times, regardless of data 
source, and without special efforts or insights on the part of the user about the data source(s)".

Specific research objectives identified in the BAA are:

1.	Identify individuals/organizations that will take the lead to foster development of 
community-based conventions for specific data types.
2.	Partner with local institutions (public and private) to improve access to coastal and regional 
data via community-based conventions.
3.	Enhance connections to existing national and international archives of ocean data as well as 
the program offices of major ocean programs (e.g., WOCE, JGOFS) via developed 
community based conventions.
4.	Partner with international groups to foster a worldwide "ocean data dictionary" to further 
commonality of access for all sources of ocean data.
5.	Work with national and international user standards groups (e.g., International Hydrographic 
Organization and their Electronic Navigation Charts) to foster access to ocean data via a 
growing number of user interfaces.

 



Phases

Year 1: The Planning Phase

•	Regional Workshops (5)

•	Synthesis of regional workshop results

•	National Workshop

•	Prepare Final Recommendations

Years 2 & 3: Implementation


Regional Workshops

Asked to consider the following issues:

1. Is DODS data model adequate for datasets to be served in region? What additions are required?

2. What are important interface issues for regional users? From data discovery to use.

3. What types of semantic metadata will be required? What standards will be used? Focus on 
search and use metadata.

4. What datasets will be served initially as part of this effort? Seed the system? What assistance is 
needed?

5. Is a regional node needed for coordination? Data location, reference for user support, etc.


National Workshop

Background
	Synthesize results of regional workshops. Study by Executive Committee.

Objective
	Develop the implementation plan for years 2 —>.

Approach
	Address same issues as at regional workshops, with synthesis as background.

Timing
	Nine months after project began

Participants
	Project management
	Regional coordinators
	Representative from federal agencies with holdings, e.g., NAVO, NODC
	Representative from national organizations of marine institutions, e.g., NAML, Sea Grant 
Program
	Representative from international organizations, e.g., Australian BMRC
	Representative from industry with significant data holdings
	Experts with data systems/networks
	Representative from other NOPP projects developing model/assimilation capabilities

Review
	Workshop recommendations to be reviewed by community


Implementation Plan

Three principal areas will be:

Population

Population refers to addition of data to system. Focus on in situ data sets — particularly regional.

System Core

Areas of expansion considered necessary are:
•	Development of GIS clients
•	Work with virtual data sets
•	Web interfaces
•	Improve Data Access Protocol


System Maintenance

Including system documentation and user support

Appendix 4:	Dan Holloway – University of Rhode Island

(http://po.gso.uri.edu/~dan/dods-regional-workshops/dods-regional-workshops.html)

The URL listed above is a link to the presentation given by the DODS group at the Gulf of 
Mexico NOPP regional workshop.

Following is a summary of a number of important points discussed during the presentation.

Introduction to DODS

? DODS is an open source software project designed to allow users to easily access and move 
data over the network.

? The DODS project has two underlying principles it adheres to:

? Anyone willing to share data should be able to do so via DODS; e.g., the scientist, a state 
agency, a private company, or a federal data center.

? Users should be able to use the application package with which they are most familiar to 
examine or analyze the data of interest.

? How these principles are incorporated into the design are as follows:

? Data providers must not be required to store their data in any special format.

? The data system must require a minimum set of metadata from the data provider.

? The DODS core software must be easy to interface to existing applications so those scientists 
can use the packages they are most familiar with.

? The data system must provide all the metadata that is required to effectively use the data in 
the client application.

The requirement to provide the minimal set of metadata required to use the data directly 
competes against the requirement to not burden the data provider with meeting specific metadata 
requirements.

The DODS project has taken a bottom-up approach toward solving the distributed data access 
problem. Rather than focus on the directory level, or data location aspect of the distributed data 
access problem, DODS has focused on the data-level interoperability. As part of that effort, the 
DODS project has delimited the metadata requirements for distributed data access into 'use' and 
'search' metadata. To achieve data-level interoperability a definition of 'use' metadata was 
formulated by segregating the data-level metadata requirements into syntactic and semantic 'use' 
metadata. The DODS core software provides a strict syntactic 'use' metadata representation in 
the data transmission component of the software. This is required in order for software 
components on the client-side to be able to decipher the encoded binary data stream. The DODS 
core software supports but does not require additional semantic 'use' metadata from the data 
provider. However, as the level of metadata increases, both 'use' metadata and 'search' metadata, 
the degree of interoperability that can be attained with remote datasets increases. It is important 
to note that all of the more advanced client applications using DODS to access remote data have 
specific semantic 'use' metadata requirements, but none of these go so far as to require FGDC 
CSDGM metadata fields.

During the presentation two DODS client applications were demonstrated.

 - NOAA's Live Access Server

The Live Access Server (LAS) is a web-server application that provides an interface to data 
stored at NOAA's Pacific Marine Environmental Lab in Seattle, and a number of DODS served 
datasets located at NOAA's Climate Diagnostic Center in Boulder, and the International 
Research Institute at Columbia's Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory.

This web-server uses a DODS-enabled client application, Ferret, to retrieve data from these 
remote sites and process it into one of the available representations defined in the interface. 
Ferret is a notable example of a scientific application whose functionality has been extended by 
enabling it to access remote datasets via DODS.

The strength of this interface is that it provides a standardized interface to a relatively large 
number of gridded datasets. Additionally, it can be easily customized for use at other sites.

The weakness of this approach is that it predefines the range of analysis possible on the remote 
datasets. The interface does permit the data to be easily downloaded, but the data must then be 
ingested into the scientist's application for further study.

 - DODS Matlab GUI

The Matlab GUI was developed as a testbed application to better understand the problems 
associated with building applications based on distributed data access. The primary result of this 
effort has been to better understand the semantic 'use' metadata requirements for data-level 
interoperability. The Matlab GUI has limited, though strict semantic 'use' metadata requirements.

The Matlab GUI provides an interface to two sets of oceanographic data, global datasets 
providing Sea Surface Temperature, Winds, etc., and local in-situ datasets for the Gulf of Maine 
GLOBEC project. These two sets present different problems to building applications using 
DODS.

The strength of this interface is that it provides direct access to the data in the scientist's analysis 
application. Once the GUI has selected and retrieved the remote data, the data is now located in 
the scientist's workspace for further analysis, or saving to local files; no additional steps are 
required.

The weakness of this interface is that it can require a high-level of effort to add new datasets to 
the interface. However, this constraint has led to better understanding of the various aspects of 
'use' level metadata requirements.

DODS current development activities.

1. The DODS core software has been ported to Java.
2. A JDBC server has been built and is currently in beta test at OSU and MBARI.
3. A GrADS server has been built using the Java port by the COLA group. This server can 
provide access to GRIB data via DODS. Additionally, this server can be used to process data 
remotely, returning the results of those operations as DODS datasets.
4. There is a native Windows port of the DODS core, as well as a Cygwin port of the software 
for PCs.
5. There is a WMT-DODS gateway prototype in development at NASA's Goddard Space Flight 
Center.
6. The DODS Matlab GUI is being rewritten to facilitate adding new and n-dimensional 
datasets, and to allow the user to easily customize the interface for their use. 

DODS future development activities.

? The project is actively pursuing migrating the core's data access protocol (DAP), to use XML 
as an encoding scheme.
? DODS is working with NGDC and ESRI to make DODS data accessible to GIS clients, and 
GIS data accessible to DODS clients.
? The project is investigating designs to support tertiary metadata servers, as well as client-side 
metadata support, to permit interoperability for datasets with limited associated metadata.
? A web-crawler will be designed and implemented as part of the NOPP project to assist data 
location.

Comments on DODS

The DODS project has taken a bottom-up approach in proposing solutions to the distributed data 
access problem. At it's current stage of development the project is focused on data-level 
interoperability in that problem domain. Goals of the project have been to permit scientists to 
easily serve, and access data over the Internet. To accomplish this the software must not require 
any reformatting of data by providers, and permit direct access to data within the scientist's 
existing analysis environment. To reach these goals the project has selected several client 
applications to demonstrate the concept, Matlab, idl, and NetCDF. The project also identified a 
number of commonly used data formats, as well as packages which support access to PI help 
datasets. Arguably, pre-built servers for every data format used in the science community are not 
currently provided by the DODS project, but as has been demonstrated by various groups writing 
DODS servers can be a realistic alternative.

At its current stage of development DODS does provide direct access to data within a number of 
scientific analysis environments. Unfortunately, given the lack of standardized interfaces for 
searching for data within the community at large, or within specific data repositories, 
formulating DODS URLs to access datasets can be difficult. One goal of an integrated data 
system should be to work toward standardized mechanisms for accessing distributed data, which 
includes both ease of location and use of those data.

Appendix 5:	John Blaha - Naval Oceanographic Office

(Used overheads)
 
Northern Gulf Littoral Initiative (NGLI)

Purpose:
- Develop reliable, multidisciplinary models of the Mississippi Sound and adjoining rivers, 
bays, and shelf waters through the operation of a sustainable forecasting system.

- Has worked with numerous groups in the past.

- Develop skill toward shore from sea.

- First year was a modeling effort, some RS and in-situ observations, tied into Navy Hub.

- Slide showing map of region.

- Bathymetry is the Navy’s business.

- Slide of intrusions map.

- Nested palm 200 to 500 meter mesh.

- Slide of model generation, banding effects of shelf area.

- Slide of basin model.

- Slide In-situ domain (measurement infrastructure).

- Slide of sediment transport. 

- Slides of drifter data.

- Slides of ADCP locations.

- Slide of Altimeter Calibration.

- Slide of Local Geoid – SST data.

Question: On what DODS node will data appear?
- Outside of firewall on MEL Server.

Appendix 6:	John Lever – NAVOCEANO

(Presentation on Power Point)

Possible venues of DODs

Slide - Objective Functional Architecture.

Slide - NAVOceano Data Distribution.
- Web page showing available products.
- Data warehouse.

Slide - Web Server flow chart.
- Access to data warehouse.
- NGLI link.

Slide - Potential DWH Architecture WEB Proxy.

Slide - Dissemination Architecture.
- NAVO LAN.
- Firewall DMZ.
- Internet.

Slide - Master Environmental Library  (MEL).
- MEL v3.0.

Slide – MEL Expanded Flow Chart.

Slide - MEL data discovery and delivery.

Slide - DWH Mass Storage.
- Purpose is for service production, processing and selected archiving of NAVOCEANO data 
sets.

Slide - FY01 Mass Storage Acquisition.
	High-Volume Near-line Storage.
              On-line Storage.
	Network Connectivity Upgrades to Data Servers.
	Network Attached Storage.
	
Slide - High-Volume Near-line Storage.

Slide - Online Storage.

Many other partners involved.

Metadata is FGDC compliant.  Metadata not necessarily tagged with data can be downloaded if 
desired.

Appendix 7:	Jim O’Brien -  COAPS, Florida State University

(Presentation on PowerPoint)

Modeling the Gulf of Mexico with Satellite Winds

Several slides of example animations:
•	Showing Near-real-time Winds and Surface Pressures.
•	www.coaps.fsu.edu/~zierden/qscat AND http://www.coaps.fsu.edu/~zierden/qscat/gulf.shtml
•	Swath data are used, not gridded data or interpolated fields.

SeaWinds on QuckSCAT Satellite.

SEE  http://www.coaps.fsu.edu/cgi-bin/qscat/animations.cgi?request=listr&region=smex

Sea Winds Daily Coverage.

Examples of Sea Winds Overpass.

Two products available:
•	Research. SEE http://www.coaps.fsu.edu/scatterometry/Qscat/gridded.shtml
•	Operational. SEE http://manati.wwb.noaa.gov/quikscat/

Research Quality Gridded Winds:
•	Global, six-hourly, gridded winds.
•	Currently 1x1 degree.

Gulf of Mexico Modeling Goals with the NCOM:
•	Get a better understanding of meso-scale dynamics.
•	Examine two-way ocean interaction between the continental shelf and the Gulf of Mexico 
basin.
•	Model oceanic response to energetic episodic forcing in upper ocean wave stratification.
•	Apply improved modeled physics to ocean nutrient distribution.
•	Improve ocean prediction capabilities in Gulf using SeaWinds scatterometer data and 
TOPEX/Poseidon altimeter data.

Have a 6-min. model, currently running with a 3-min. model, eventually will have local model 
going down to 1 km. Eventually all of Gulf done in 1-km model.

Will deliver half by half degree, every 6 hours gridded winds for the Gulf of Mexico for this 
project using Seawinds satellite.
 
Lots of animation on web site.
Web site:     http://www.coaps.fsu.edu

Goal is to have very good model runs.

Appendix 8:	Nan Walker – LSU

(Used overheads)

Main data sources of the Coastal Studies Institute:

1. Real time data.
-  Earth Scan Lab satellite imagery.
- WAVCIS wave-current data.
- BAYWATCH physical measurements program.

2. Historic data archives.
- Estuarine time series.
- LATEX inner shelf.
- Physical measurement in hypoxia region.
- Satellite imagery.

Earth Scan Laboratory of Coastal Studies Institute was started in 1988.

NOAA AVHRR:
- Detects suspended sediments, temp.
-      Spatial resolution is 1 square km.

Orbview:
- Used for detecting chlorophyll-a suspended, and other suspended sediments.

Projects:
GOES-8GVAR
- Temp @ 4x4 square km. and water vapor @ 8x8 square km.
- Has visible channel @ 1km.

Slide – Composite image.

Project involvement:
EPA EMPACT project.
MODIS Terra and Aqua (will be getting X-Band soon).
RADAR- ERS-2, Radarsat (future).
IRS-P4 Ocean Color (future).

WAVCIS Project (headed by Greg Stone):
-     Focus is on LA shelf in Mississippi Sound.
- Real time, high resolution of waves and currents.
- Wave-current surge information system for coastal LA.
- Good for comparing wave data.
- No conductivity or surface temp. data.
- Using cellular/satellite communication.
- Using acoustic Doppler tech.

Benefits associated with WAVCIS program:
- Directional waves measurement.
- Current velocity.
- Water level storm surge.
- Wind speed and direction.
- Using data with other groups.

Has a website where you can pick parameters and do analyses.

Fundamental research.

BAYWATCH Program:
- Funded by US Army Corps
 Measures:
- Currents.
- Water level.
- Turbidity.
- Salinity/Conductivity.
- Wind speed/direction, air pressure/temperature.

Showed a GOES-8 ocean temperature animation loop of circulation in the Gulf of Mexico.

LSU is open to possibility of serving data via DODS.


Appendix 9:	Frank Muller-Karger and Doug Myhre - University of South Florida

(Used PowerPoint file)

Remote Sensing Capabilities at USF

USF Datasets:
Satellite.
-  Remote sensing lab.

Field.
- PORTS
- COMPS
- ECOHAB
- (+ numerous field programs)

Satellite Sensors:
- Current AVHRR.
-      NOAA -12
-      NOAA-14
-      NOAA-15
-      NOAA-16
- SeaWIFS
- TERRA/MODIS

Historic (since ’93):
- AVHRR
- SeaWIFS
-      CZCS (1978-1986)

Coverage:
- Land (southeastern US, Central America, northern South America, and Caribbean Islands).
- Ocean (Gulf of Mexico, Caribbean Sea, eastern tropical Pacific).

Primary Data streams:
- Terascan system (L-Band)
Orbview –II/SeaWIFS
POES/AVHRR

- Apogee Solutions (X-Band)
Terra/MODIS

Volume of Data Collected:
- CZCS	~20 GB
- AVHRR  690MB/day
	(3 satellites, 12 passes/day)
- SeaWIFS 150MB/day
	(1 pass/day)
- MODIS
	(4 passes/day)

Current Products:
See website, http://paria.marine.usf.edu

Secondary data streams, X-Band:
- Long term
ENVISAT (MERIS)
ADEOS-II (GLI)
NPOESS
-     (FMK is member of ENVISAT, ADEOS-II Science teams)

Data Archived:
- AVHRR, all raw data and products
- SeaWIFS, all raw data and products
- MODIS, products

Data Archives:
- Data Stored on 12” Worm Optical Disk.
AVHRR raw data.
- CD-ROM
 600 disk jukebox (300gb Capacity)
        SeaWIFS Raw and LO data.

Other data archives:
- DVD-R
- DLT Tape (future).
- MODIS Raw Data.

Samples shown on overheads

USF requirements:
- Coastal shelf salinity/hydrography.
- Coastal shelf winds.
- Coastal shelf currents.
- Offshore currents for shelf-break force studies.
- River discharge and nutrient concentration.
- Yucatan Strait transport.
- Florida Strait transport.

Possible Cooperative Efforts:
- Integration of FL COMPS/TEXAS and other in-situ observing systems with real-time remote 
sensing systems.
- Integration of above with regional modeling efforts.

USF Plans:
- NOWCAST circulation model of West Florida Shelf.
-      Integrated current, wind field, and real time satellite data product (dynamic vector overlays).
-      Surface flux estimates.
-      Collect data from future sensors.

Worries:
- Nice to have DODS, but where does this take us in the long-term with data that each of us 
depend on and that are not available via centralized legacy systems?
- DODS effort should focus on a few, select datasets considered critical for long-term archival.

Appendix 10:	George Ioup – University of New Orleans

(Spoke from notes)

Some surveys are site-specific and not very regular.  Data for some models are sparse.

1)  UNO involved with Lake Pontchartrain Basin Project.
 
Making data public is the goal, on website at a minimum.

Some data include:
- Water turbidity.
- Conductivity.
- Temperature.
- Chlorophyll A.
- Orleans Parish rain chemistry.
- Circulation models.
- Fecal coliform bacteria.
- Sediment chemistry.
- Lake bathymetry.

Data can potentially go on DODS.  Lake Pontchartrain Atlas to be published.

Contacts:  Professor Alex McCorquodale, Civil and Environmental Engineering
	Professors Mike Porrier and Bob Cashner, Biological Sciences
	Professor Shea Penland, Geology and Geophysics

2) Barataria Basin Project

UNO, LSU, LSU-Ag, LUMCON, Tulane, Dillard

Environmental measurements in Barataria Basin related to carbon cycling in a coastal estuary.

Making data public is the goal, on website at a minimum.
Data can potentially go on DODS.

Contact:  Professor Ken Holladay, Mathematics

3)  Louisiana and Northern Gulf Coast Coastal Measurements

Many measurements made with USGS, Corps of Engineers, National Marine Fisheries, 
Louisiana Department of Natural Resources, and other sponsorships.  Data already available on 
website.  Data can potentially go on DODS. 

Contacts:  Professors Shea Penland and Denise Reed, Geology and Geophysics
	
4) Northern Gulf of Mexico Acoustics Data

USM, NRL-Stennis, UNO

Making data public is goal, on website at a minimum.  Data can potentially go on DODS.  

-    Ambient noise measurements.
- Marine mammal acoustic measurements.
- Acoustic propagation, including propagation through fronts and eddys.

Contacts:  Professors George and Juliette Ioup, Physics
Professor Grayson Rayborn, Physics and Astronomy, USM


Appendix 11:	Jim Corbin - MSU ERC/SSC/IDSL

Distributed Marine Environment Forecast System - DMEFS
The proposed DMEFS will be a research testbed for demonstrating the integration of various 
technologies and components prior to DoD operational use, and an “open” framework in which 
to operate validated climate, weather, and ocean (CWO) models The focus is:
? To create an open framework for a distributed system for describing and predicting the 
marine environment that will accelerate the evolution of timely and accurate forecasting. 
? To adapt distributed (scalable) computational technology into oceanic and meteorological 
predictions, especially on the regional and tactical scales
? To shorten the model development time by expanding the collaboration among the model 
developers, the software engineering community and the operational end-users. 
? To provide a system with the look and feel of an operational entity in terms of infrastructure 
but with advanced computers, software technology and none of the constraints of an 
operational environment. To provide unique cross-cutting capabilities (i.e., software 
integration technologies and support resources) to DoD and yet let DoD simultaneously 
leverage existing internal expertise and investments, including legacy components (e.g., 
ocean models, atmospheric models, tools, etc.). 
? To provide a framework that is extensible and designed for rapid prototyping, validation, and 
deployment of new models and tools and be operational over evolving heterogeneous 
platforms distributed over wide areas with web-based access of forecast-derived information.
? Middle tier servers that form a distributed, shared, persistent, collaborative environment for 
model development, validation, coupling, deployment and operational use. Implemented as a 
multi-tier, object oriented system. The middle tier components act as proxies of services 
rendered by the back-end resources.
The Web Portal for DMEFS provides a seamless web access to remote resources through secure 
kerberized CORBA channels hiding complexity of the high performance, heterogeneous back-
end systems:
- Primary operational user is Naval Oceanographic Office
- Primary research user is the Naval research Lab Stennis
- Develop and/or run met/ocean models
- Validate METOC models
- Create METOC support products from model runs and other data
Provides a graphical problem-solving environment to do problem solving from workstation, 
desktop, or laptop. A core set of services will be provided by the DMEFS architecture to support 
the development of meta computing applications including:
- Resource Management, Discovery, and Access Control
- Security and Access Control
- Transaction Services
- Communication Services
- Event and Notification Services
- METOC Digital Library and Data Services
Web Browser based front end that can:
- Couple models.
- Develop models.
- Visualize results.
- Access external data. 
- Deploy models.
- Set schedules.
- Provide operational execution and access operational data.

Appendix 12:	Worth Nowlin - Texas A&M

MMS-sponsored activities from which data are or will be available include:

? LATEX
? Northeast Gulf of Mexico Chemical and Hydrographic Study
? CHEMO I and II
? MAMES I and III
? Deep Gulf of Mexico Benthic Biology

Also available are archives of:
	Ocean station, XBT, MBT, and AXBT data, current measurements (moored, drifters and 
shipboard ADCP)

Ancillary data archives include:
? Daily river discharge from U.S. rivers
? Surface observations via GTS
? Analyzed surface wind fields.

Additional data sets include:
? EPA EMAP data focused on contaminants
? NOAA Status and Trends data for 14 years
? National Estuarine Product data from Galveston and Corpus Christi Bays

TAMU agrees to set up a DODS server and initially serve data from LATEX A and daily river 
discharge files.

Appendix 13:	Norman Guinasso - representing the Texas General Land Office


Texas Automated Buoy System (TABS):
- Initiated as an Interagency Research Contract with Texas A&M University (TAMU) in 1994.
- Work is carried out at GERG and Department of Oceanography, TAMU
- The mission is prediction of oil spill movement along Texas coast.
- First buoys were installed in 1995.
- Currently operate seven buoys with single point current meters and ocean surface 
temperature sensors.
- Data sampled at 30 minute intervals and served in near real real-time on the Internet  
- Fulfills operational need of Texas General Land office.

Operational Elements of TABS with web pages:
- Operation of buoys and data presentation at http://www.gerg.tamu.edu/tglo .
- Continuous assembly of meteorological data for modeling purposes at 
http://seawater.tamu.edu/tglo/  
- Forecasts of ocean currents using POM and Spectral numerical models of ocean currents at 
http://seawater.tamu.edu/tglo/

How TABS data and predictions are used for tactical oil spill response 
http://resolute.gerg.tamu.edu/~norman/TABS-DODS.htm  (Slide 1)

TABS data was effectively used to reduce the cost of the response to Buffalo Barge 292 Oil Spill 
in 1996. Knowledge of ocean currents prevented a massive mobilization of resources along the 
northern Texas Coast off Sabine and allowed cleanup efforts to be directed further down the 
coast. 
http://resolute.gerg.tamu.edu/~norman/TABS-DODS.htm  (Slide 2)

Operate two kinds of buoys, anchored in place by heavy chain.
- TABS I , TABS II 
http://resolute.gerg.tamu.edu/~norman/TABS-DODS.htm  (Slide 6)

- TABS II with ADCP and meteorological package
http://resolute.gerg.tamu.edu/~norman/TABS-DODS.htm  (Slide 7)

TABS buoy data communications.

TABS I or TABS II
- Motorola Integrated by cell phone. Cell phone service provided over most of central GOM 
shelf by Petrocom 
http://resolute.gerg.tamu.edu/~norman/TABS-DODS.htm  (Slide 8)

TABS II 
-    Westinghouse 1000 Satellite Cell Phone at 4800 baud
-     Buoys make digital data calls using NorcomNetworks X.25 network connecting to 
computers at Texas A&M University

TABS data

Available on web page as graphics and downloadable ASCII files. Historical data available as 
Web CGI enquiries on TABS database.  Historical enquiries produce graphics or downloadable 
files.

Cost of Data Transmission using Petrocom Cell Phone Network
$1.09 per minute


          Bytes per    Reading   Bytes per day  Bytes per   Data cost per 
          reading      Interval                 month        month

Single point   149    30 minutes   7,152         214,560     $196
current meter

Cost of Data Transmission using NORCOM Satellite Network
$185 per month for first 500,000 bytes,  $0.38 per 1000 additional bytes

          Bytes per    Reading   Bytes per day  Bytes per   Data cost per 
          reading      Interval                 month        month

Single point   149    30 minutes   7,152         214,560     $185
current meter

ADCP          1100     Hourly     26,400         792,000     $296


TABS Future Developments

Winter, 2000-2001

Install TABS II buoy with ADCP at Flower Garden Banks National Marine Sanctuary 
(FGBNMS)

Install 2 TABS II buoys with ADCPs in Mississippi Sound as part of Northern Gulf Littoral 
Initiative (NGLI)

Install meteorological package on three TABS II buoys

Install SeaBird Micro-Seacat TS sensor on  FGBNMS buoy


Spring-Summer 2001

Replace electromagnetic single point current meters with Aanderaa 2D Doppler Current meters 
Install and test Falmouth Scientific NXIC conductivity sensor on TABS buoy


2001-2002

Install Bottom mounted packages that communicate through surface buoys, to measure nutrients, 
dissolved oxygen, light, and other parameters in near real time at two to four TABS sites along 
Texas Coast.

Appendix 14:	Ruben Solis – Texas Water Development Board

Estuarine Hydrographic Surveys 
(http://hyper20.twdb.state.tx.us/data/bays_estuaries/surveypage.html)

Synoptic measurements collected in Texas bays from 1987 to 1997
Data includes physical (water level, velocity, flow) and quality (salinity, pH, DO, temperature) 
measurements
Data available through clickable map, in text and graphical format
Metadata included with data files

Coastal Hydrology (http://hyper20.twdb.state.tx.us/data/bays_estuaries/hydrologypage.html): 
Historical inflows (1940-1998, and being updated) for Texas bays
Monthly flows available in text format from web site
Rudimentary metadata available with data files

Sonde Data (http://hyper20.twdb.state.tx.us/data/bays_estuaries/sondpage.html): 
Continuous sonde measurements of salinity, pH, DO, temperature, and at some sites turbidity, 
water elevation
Two sondes/estuary typically deployed
Program initiated in 1986
Text data and graphs of data available on web site

Hydrodynamic and Oil Spill Modeling 
(http://hyper20.twdb.state.tx.us/data/bays_estuaries/bhydpage.html)
Hydrodynamic models for Corpus Christi and Galveston Bays conducted daily
Animated output displaying currents and water elevations available on web
Short-term (1-day) forecasts displayed

Appendix 15:	Patrick Michaud – Conrad Blucher Institute for Surveying and Science; 
Texas A&M University Corpus Christi

Texas Coastal Ocean Observation Network:
- Map of flags collecting data.
- Zoomed on Corpus Christi.
- Showed individual tidal stations.
- Put in for water circulation and property boundaries. 
- Collect mean tidal datum.

Entirely Web based.

Web Page of Port Aransas:
- List of station info and latest observations.
- Water level.
- Air temp.
- Wind speed.
- Etc.

Historical data are available.

Quality control done everyday.
- Must have continuous data stream.

Web page of graphs explained. 

Data query page, can get station they are interested in:
- Perform sophisticated data retrieval.
- Can make adjustments (feet vs. meters).
- View for mean sea level.
- Compare two stations.

Mainly developed for internal use.

Can provide in raw data format.

Metadata sent back to requestor (cited numerous examples of using metadata). 

System does numerous checks and is completely automated.

Produces tidal datum.

Benchmark leveling, dates, equipment, etc.

Moving vector map demo.

Others have asked for tidal datum to be produced by their shop.

Tide gauge point source data is their forte.

Have potential to integrate into DODS.
- Need to produce capabilities to share data but would require significant investment.

Appendix 16:	Mark Luther – University of South Florida

(Used overheads)

Coastal Ocean Monitoring and Prediction System (COMPS)

Gulf of Mexico Ocean Observing Systems – website

COMPS web site  http://comps.marine.usf.edu:
- Map of real time observing sites on west coast of FL.
- Owned and operated by USF or other agencies.
- Four buoys btw. 20 – 50 isobaths, several coastal stations with water level, met, 
temp/salinity.

Can click on station to:
- Get photos.
- Show metadata on station.
- Show numerous parameter measurements by variable.

Have data for last 24 hrs in graphical format.
- Line of sight radio and/or GOES satellite telemetry.
- Have a GOES downlink, it’s free but slow.

Developed a custom data logger for ADCP, T/S, and met data, with GOES telemetry and spread-
spectrum radio.

Overheads of buoys:
- Have full suite of instruments – ADCP (downward-looking), wind speed/direction, air temp., 
humidity, barometic pressure, precipitation, incoming radiation (SW, LW), MicroCat T/S 
sensors.
- Held by heavy chain and RR wheels.

Two types:
1. Low-cost – telemeters met only via single GOES ID
2. Cadillac – telemeters ADCP and T/S data and met data on Dual GOES ID's.

Graphs from individual buoys during a storm.
- Various measurements from a meter below surface.

Began in 1997:
- Data archived in ASCII flat files.
- Developing searchable database system

Tampa Bay PORTS, a sub-system of COMPS (http://ompl.marine.usf.edu/PORTS.

Suite of Models based on Princeton model.
- Overhead showing models.
Oil spill trajectory modeling is also done.

Data is delivered from PORTS to harbor pilots via a Vessel Traffic Information System 
(http://www.rossdsc.com/ais.htm)

Overhead of Tropical Storm Josephine (Oct. 1996), color showing non-tidal component – 
simulated storm surge from numerical model of West Florida Shelf.
- Extensive flooding in Tampa Bay region from modest storm
- See http://ocg6.marine.usf.edu/WeisbergSite/StormSurgePlot.ppt for detailed storm surge 
study

Have some COMP sites in Cuban waters.
Developing coastal ARGO drifters/profilers

Text from flyer:

Coastal Ocean Monitoring and Prediction System

Florida is the United States’ fourth most populous state, with 80% of the population living in a 
coastal county.  Several recent storms have brought large, unpredicted flooding to Florida’s west 
coast.  The coastal sea level response to tropical and extra-tropical storms results from wind 
forcing over the entire continental shelf.  Much of the local response may be due to storm winds 
quite distant from the local area of concern, a case in point being tropical storm Josephine, a 
modest storm that nevertheless caused extensive flooding in the Tampa Bay area.

The University of South Florida has implemented a real-time Coastal Ocean Monitoring and 
Prediction System (COMPS) for West Florida. COMPS provides additional data needed for a 
variety of management issues, including more accurate predictions of coastal flooding by storm 
surge, safety and efficiency of marine navigation, search and rescue efforts, and fisheries 
management, as well as supporting basic research programs.  COMP consists of an array of 
instrumentation both along the coast and offshore, combined with numerical circulation models, 
and builds upon existing in-situ measurements and modeling programs funded by various state 
and federal agencies.  In addition, COMPS links to the USF Remote Sensing Laboratory, which 
collects real-time satellite imagery via its HRPT and X-Band receivers.  This observing system 
fulfills all of the requirements of the Coastal Module of the Global Ocean Observing System 
(CGOOS).  Data and model products are disseminated in real-time to federal, state, and local 
management officials, as well as the general public, via the Internet (URL 
http://comps.marine.usf.edu).  COMPS is designed to support a variety of operational and 
research efforts, including storm surge prediction, environmental protection, coastal erosion and 
sediment transport, red tide research (ECOHAB - Ecology of Harmful Algal Blooms), and 
hyperspectral satellite remote sensing of coastal ocean dynamics (HYCODE).  A precedent for 
this system already exists in the form of the Tampa Bay PORTS (Physical Oceanographic Real-
Time System) - itself a first for monitoring estuaries. 

The majority of COMPS stations are fully operational, with additional stations planned for the 
near future. An array of offshore buoys measures current, temperature, salinity, and 
meteorological parameters, with satellite telemetry of the data to shore. Additional buoys have 
been deployed off Sarasota as part of the ECOHAB and HYCODE efforts.  A network of coastal 
towers that are instrumented with water level, temperature, salinity, meteorological, and bio-
optical sensor augments buoy observations. Many of these sites are operated in collaboration 
with the United States Coast Guard, the Citrus County Office of Emergency Management, and 
the Pasco County Office of Disaster Preparedness. Additional instrumentation will be installed at 
Boca Grande, Cedar Key, Keaton Beach, and near the mouth of the St. Marks River, enhancing 
existing stations operated by partner agencies.

A numerical circulation model, based on the Princeton Ocean Model, has been developed for the 
entire West Florida Shelf, with an offshore boundary stretching from the Mississippi Delta to the 
Florida Keys.  This model has been successful in simulating past storm surge events and will be 
coupled to the COMPS real-time data stream to be run in a nowcast/forecast mode. Sea surface 
temperature and ocean color data from the West Florida shelf routinely collected by our Remote 
Sensing Laboratory can be combined with in situ data and model output to provide a 
comprehensive analysis of oceanic conditions.

The COMPS data archival and distribution system will collate data streams from the USF-
operated sites with those from sites operated by other agencies into a seamless web-based 
interface.  We have multiple satellite downlinks (both DRGS and DOMSAT) for receiving 
GOES data telemetry from remote sites.  We are collaborating with the NOAA National Ocean 
Data Center, the NOAA Coastal Services Center, and the National Ocean Service to develop a 
comprehensive data base management system for the acquisition, archival, quality assurance, 
and distribution of these data.

Collaborating Agencies: Florida Dept. of Environmental Protection, Florida Marine Research 
Institute, Florida Institute of Oceanography, Citrus County, Pasco County, United States 
Geological Survey, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, United States Coast 
Guard, Office of Naval Research, Minerals Management Service, U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency.

For more information contact:
Prof. Mark E. Luther		Prof. Robert H. Weisberg
Tel: 727-553-1528		Tel: 727-553-1568
luther@marine.usf.edu		weisberg@marine.usf.edu



Appendix 17:	Bob Molinari - NOAA/AOML

Global Ocean Observing System

NCEP
- Both real time and delayed mode data.

Whats available:
Drifter Data:
-      Lots available in Gulf of Mexico.
- Recent in nature.
- 1996, ’97
- 1998 had a large deployment.
- 1999 had good coverage in Caribbean.
- Jan to May 2000.

Overhead of 1968 data.
Overhead of 1970 data.

How do they get data out?
-      Takes a month for delayed drifter data.
- Can also get raw data.
- Both historical and real-time.

Would like to put other data on-line:
- Some data in Yucatan. 
- Has hurricane slice data.
- Florida Bay data.

Data available from other sources as well.

Question as to whether AOML should be a DODS site.

The data to be served by AOML comes under the purview of the NOAA Global Ocean 
Observing System Center established at the laboratory. The objectives of the Center are to 
provide to NOAA and to other users the data needed to initialize weather and climate forecast 
models (in real-time) and to increase our understanding of the coupled climate system (in 
delayed-mode).  The GOOS Center manages:

•	The Global Drifter Center which provides surface current, SST and some meteorological 
data. These data are presently available at the AOML web page and we would be willing to 
serve these data as part of DODS.

°	The US VOS XBT network which provides temperature profiles. Both historical and recent 
data are available at the AOML web page and we would be willing to serve these data as part 
of DODS.

We can also provide histroical CTD data collected in the Gulf of Mexico by AOML. These data 
are presently not available on the Web. Finally we can serve the data resulting from NOAA's 
Florida Bay project.  Both real- and delayed mode-data can be provided to DODS.   

Appendix 18:	Tony Amos - University of Texas – Marine Science Institute (UTMSI)

Using slides, Amos showed the setting of the UTMSI and some of the projects that might 
provide data for a DODS site.

- UTMSI is located on the north end of Mustang Island, Texas, one of a series of barrier 
islands bordering the Gulf of Mexico on the ocean side and Corpus Christi Bay on the 
landward side.  UTMSI is a graduate research unit of the University of Texas’ College of 
Natural Sciences with a faculty of 13 and 25 graduate students.  In addition, two six-week 
upper level summer courses are given each year.  The research interest is primarily in bays 
and estuaries, and mostly biological, with research projects in mariculture, harmful algal 
blooms, macro-algae and phytoplankton, fish endrochronology, early life history of fish, 
predator/prey relationships, benthic ecology, and physical oceanography.  The physical 
setting is ideal with the large range of marine environments nearby, ranging from the Gulf to 
the hyper-saline Laguna Madre.  There are several data sets that could be posted on a DODS 
server.  
- The R/V Longhorn is UTMSI’s main research vessel.  This 105-ft R/V has made several 
hundred short cruises into the Gulf since 1972.  From the late 1970’s onward, CTD stations 
have been made on most of these multi-purpose cruises.  The data would need standardizing 
as they have been made with evolving STD/CTD instruments.  For the past decade, Sea-Bird 
911/Plus CTDs have been used.  Also, meteorological and surface oceanographic data are 
routinely measured throughout every Longhorn cruise.
- Current meter data from the continental shelf area in the Gulf, and from passes and bays are 
available
- Continuous meteorological, tide and current data have been collected at the Pier Laboratory 
in the Aransas Pass Ship Channel (main entrance to Corpus Christi Bay from the Gulf)
- Amos would make a twenty-two-year time series of surf zone sea temperature and salinity 
available.
- Real time data is available on the UTMSI webs site (http://www.utmsi.utexas.edu).  Click on 
Weather and Tides (demonstrated) to get current and previous day’s sea, tides and weather 
data in graphic or spreadsheet form.
- Overheads showing important recent storms: Hurricanes Allen, Gilbert and last year’s Brett, 
Tropical Storm Josephine and Francis.  Data depicting real and predicted tides.  Could make 
tidal predictions for different Texas locations available for DODS.
- Other data sets at UTMSI may be available.  These include time-series of dissolved oxygen 
in the Laguna, benthic data, and beach erosion information.

Amos also posed the question; would it be feasible to post Gulf of Mexico bathymetric and 
shoreline data on a DODS site.

Appendix 19:	Susan Starke – NOAA/National Coastal Data Development Center 

(PowerPoint Demo)

NCDDC Phase 0 Goals:
- Develop mission statement staffing plan.
- Initiate Phase I planning process.
- Implement initial proof-of -concept.
- Establish facility at Stennis Space Center & hold NCDDC dedication.

Mission Function:
- Provide archive and access for the long-term coastal data record.
- Includes data cataloging/data mining, data access, data QC/Integration, archiving, and new 
product development.

Phase I Planning:
- Concept of operations (CON-OPS) by 10/00.
documents “nuts and bolts” of phase 0 operations.
- Phase 0 to Phase 1 Transition Plan by 10/00.
- Phase I requirements documentation by 12/00.
- Includes feedback from phase 0 operations.
- How to validate requirements.

Appendix 20:	Richard Campanella - Tulane–Xavier Center for Bioenvironmental 
Research - Long-term Ecosystem Assessment Group (LEAG)


The Long-term Ecosystem Assessment Group (LEAG) was organized in 1999 by a consortium 
of academic/research institutions and NAVOCEANO. The goals of LEAG include:
? Establish a cooperative effort between the government (Naval Oceanographic Office), 
academia (CBR), and private industry (COTS Technology)
? Use the Mississippi River and areas of the Gulf of Mexico as a natural laboratory to 
conduct research to evaluate the extent of ecological and economic impacts of nutrient 
over-enrichment in this region
? Create a biotechnology corridor between Louisiana and Mississippi for codevelopment of 
biosensors, Autonomous Underwater Vehicles (AUV’s), models for major river and gulf 
systems, and deep sea monitoring and communication technologies

The Center for Bioenvironmental Research constitutes the lead academic entity of the Long 
Term Estuary Assessment Group (LEAG), a collaboration of government, academic and private 
organizations that is conducting research on river-ocean interactions and coastal oceanographic 
processes. LEAG’s goal is to develop effective management strategies to deal with 
environmental issues related to rivers and their interactions with coastal margin and ocean 
ecosystems.  One issue of interest is the coastal eutrophication caused by excessive introduction 
of nutrients into an aquatic ecosystem, leading to increased algal production and increased 
availability of particulate organic carbon. The effects of eutrophication, hypoxic dead zones, 
harmful algal blooms, ad changing fisheries populations can have global economic and 
biological implications.

The partnership established with LEAG will utilize some of the best minds in the fields of 
biology, geology, engineering, chemistry and oceanography. It will enable research discoveries 
and new technological developments that would not be possible if the participating organizations 
were not working in unison. Through its Mississippi River Interdisciplinary Research (MiRIR) 
Program, the CBR is conducting scientific and cultural research and education programs on the 
river. The Naval Oceanographic Office is an accomplished oceanographic operations facility that 
is uniquely qualified to support data management, modeling and AUV development activities. 
COTS Technology specializes in the acoustics, robotics and optics of marine research, and will 
provide technical, financial and operational background for the development of AUV’s for data 
collection.  Through the Office of Naval Research (ONR), LEAG is fostering what is anticipated 
to be the first living biosensor that will be deployed on a autonomous underwater vehicle.

Additional partners that have joined LEAG include the Louisiana Universities Marine 
Consortium (LUMCON); the University of Southern Mississippi; Woods Hole Oceanographic 
Institute (WHOI) in Massachusetts; and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers’ Waterways 
Experimentation Station (WES), Vicksburg, MS.

By utilizing the Mississippi River and the Gulf of Mexico as a natural laboratory, the LEAG 
program will improve the capacity of the United States to monitor the risk of exposure to 
defense related toxicants in other systems throughout the world.

LEAG is interested in seeing what it can offer to the DODS, and what it can utilize from the 
DODS.
01/01/01	1

