APPENDIX IV















Northeast Regional Workshop



National Ocean Partnership Program, Virtual Ocean Data Hub
(VODHub)


Distributed Oceanographic Data System (DODS)














January 8th – 10th, 200
URI – W. Alton Jones Campus
West Greenwich, RI


Introduction and Workshop Objectives

The meeting convened with Linda Mercer, NE regional DODS coordinator, asking the 
audience to introduce themselves (see Appendix A).  An overhead was displayed 
showing the following questions that the workshop attendees were to address:

1. Is there an area(s) of common interest in the Northeast?
2. What datasets will be served via the system?
3. Is the DODS data model adequate for the datasets to be served in the NE?
4. What are the important interface issues for users in the region?
5. What types of semantic metadata will be required and what semantic standards will 
be used?
6. Is a central regional node required to provide coordination including services such as 
user support, data location, etc.?

Overview and Demonstration of DODS

Dan Holloway, URI DODS technical lead, went to the DODS demonstration website and 
proceeded to show a series of web pages describing DODS.  A complete overview of the 
DODS data model can be found at: http://po.gso.uri.edu/~dan/dods-regional-
workshops/dods-regional-workshops.html.  

Dan explained the five steps involved to analyze data:
LOCATE
SUBSET
ACQUIRE
INGEST
ANALYZE

The DODS portion involves the middle three steps, i.e., SUBSETTING, ACQUIRING, 
and INGESTING.  DODS does not focus on LOCATION or ANALYSIS.  What DODS 
is not, and the underlying philosophy of DODS, were covered.

Dan went on to explain that DODS is built from the bottom up, i.e., by putting high 
functionality at the data acquisition level, and that functionality decreases from the 
bottom up (the data level being at the bottom, the inventory level in the middle and the 
directory level at the top).

The underlying philosophy of DODS was reiterated and is twofold:
- Anyone willing to share their data should be able to do so via DODS.
- The user should be able to use the application package with which she or he is the 
most familiar, to examine or analyze the data of interest.

Constraints of the DODS system include making it easy for the scientist to serve data 
AND to make it easy to access data.

Syntactic and semantic metadata were described and how they relate to the data, 
inventory, and directory levels.  Semantic metadata can be sub-setted into use and search 
categories.  Use metadata can be further subdivided into translational use metadata and 
descriptive use metadata. The focus of DODS is on translational use metadata.

Four levels of interoperability at the data level (for data accessible over the network) 
were explained as follows:
- Level 0:  no syntactic or semantic metadata – FTP.
- Level 1:  rigid syntactic, no semantic metadata – DODS.
- Level 2:  rigid syntactic, human readable semantic metadata – A subset of DODS 
datasets.
- Level 3:  rigid syntactic, consistent semantic metadata; i.e., machine-readable – A 
subset of the DODS Level 2 datasets.

Three DODS data objects were defined:
1. The data descriptor structure (.dds) – the syntactic metadata for a dataset.
2. The data attribute structure (.das) – the semantic metadata for a dataset.
3. Data – the actual data in binary structure.

Additionally, DODS servers support several other services: 
- .ASCII (an ASCII representation of the data).
- .info (a more readable version of the .dds and .das combined).
- .html form (a web-based form that will help to build a DODS URL).

It was emphasized that writing DODS URLS can be difficult!

Three classes of interfaces were described based on the difficulty involved in building a 
URL.  These are in order of increasing ease-of-use:
- COMMAND LINE 
- GENERAL PURPOSE URL 
- GRAPHICAL USER INTERFACE 

The DODS data model was explained along with the data model constraints.  The 
following operations are permitted when requesting data:
- Projection.
- Relational operations on list and sequence elements.
- Rectangular and decimated subsets of arrays and grids.

And groupings of these data types:
- Array
- Structure
- List
- Sequence 
- Grid
Sequences and Grids are two separate constructs.

Data types served in the NE: 
- Hydrography
- Moorings
- Bathymetry
- Model output
- Satellite products

Global:
- Surface fluxes
- Water column climatologies
- Satellite products
- COADS climatologies
- Near real-time numerical model weather and ocean
- predictions

An example of the Live Access Server (LAS) was given.
Steps involved:
- Browser requests GIF image from PMEL site.
- PMEL Live Access Server passes request to Ferret.
- Ferret requests subset of monthly COADS SST data from local disk.
- Ferret requests subset of monthly NCEP Marine data from CDC/NOAA in Boulder.
- Ferret re-grids COADS to NCEP grid, differences, generates a GIF image and returns 
the GIF image to Live Access Server.
- Live Access Server returns GIF image to the browser.

Dan gave an example using PMEL data and another utilizing Matlab.


Workshop Participant Presentations

A good portion of the second day of the workshop was devoted to workshop participants 
giving presentations related to their organization and how they tie into the DODS 
concept. To set a context for the DODS discussion, David Mountain (NMFS, Woods 
Hole) gave an overview of a NMFS proposal for  “Ocean Observing Systems in the Gulf 
of Maine – A proposal to Integrate Existing Systems,” presented to directors from marine 
organizations/agencies in the Northeast region, October 30, 2000, sponsored by the 
Regional Association for Research in the Gulf of Maine (RARGOM). The purpose of the 
meeting was to determine interest in developing an integrated system, comprised of 
monitoring data from existing programs that will generate analytic products in order to 
meet a broad spectrum of needs across the Gulf of Maine region.  

Where Are we Now?
Many Operational Observation Programs:
- National Weather Service
- National Marine Fisheries Service
- National Ocean Service
- Dept of Fisheries and Oceans (Canada)
- Division of Marine Fisheries (MA)

Where are we now?
- Many datasets available via the web.
- Little coordination in the collection or analysis of the datasets.

Why Now?
- Improved technology.
- Increased understanding of the Gulf Ecosystem.
- From major research EOCHAB, GLOBEC, etc.
- The future is now.

The Future is Now.
- An Integrated Ocean Observing System:  A Strategy for Implementing the First Steps 
of a US Plan.
- A report (R.Fresch, chair).

Recommendations:
1. Use and enhance existing observational systems.
2. Integrate into regional demo programs.

System Components:
1. Measurement.
2. Data storage.
3. Data communication.
4. Analysis.
5. Integration.

DODS can be the critical data communication component for a distributed, integrated 
observing system in the northeast.


Linda Mercer – Maine Department of Marine Fisheries

The Maine Department of Marine Resources has numerous datasets, many of which 
include physical parameters such as temperature and salinity, that it would be willing to 
share via DODS.  Examples include:
Environmental Monitoring Program 
Year started: 1989
Data collection site: BBH Station
Collection frequency: hourly
		Barometric Pressure (mb) (in)
	Precipitation (in)
	Relative Humidity (%)
		Salinity (ppt)	
	Sea Surface Temperature (c,f) 1905
		Sea Bottom Temperature (c,f) 
	Solar Radiation (langley/min)
		Air Temperature (c,f)
	Tide Height (ft)
		Wind Direction (deg) 
	Wind Speed (mph)

Aquaculture Program
Year started: 1988
Data collection site: finfish aquaculture sites
Collection frequency: baseline at time of application then yearly 
	Current speed (m/sec)
		Dissolved Oxygen Depth Profile (%, mg/l)
		Salinity Depth Profile (ppt)
		Sea Temperature Depth Profile (c)
		pH Depth Profile  (pH/m)

Stock Enhancement Program
Year started: 1985
Data collection site: coastal Maine Rivers
Collection frequency: depends on field schedule of various projects
		Air Temperature (c,f)
		Dissolved Oxygen (Surface/Mid/Bottom) (mg/l)
		Salinity (Surface/Mid/Bottom) (ppt)
	Temperature (Surface/Mid/Bottom) (c,f)
		Water Depth (m)
		Secchi Disk (cm)
		Weather Description (qualitative)

Water Quality Program
Year started: 1989
Data collection site: 1800 rain & sample sites along coastal Maine
Collection frequency: 6/yr (min), March- November
		Salinity (ppt)
		Water Temperature (c,f)
		Tide Status (high/med/low)
		Weather Description (qualitative)
		Precipitation (in)
		Dissolved Oxygen (mg/l)

Survey – CDT
Year started: 1989
Data collection site: various vessel surveys along Maine coast
Collection frequency: survey schedule
		Water Temperature Depth Profile (c/m)
	Salinity (conductivity) Depth Profile (ppt/m)	



Linda Mercer – Gulf of Maine Ocean Observing System

The Gulf of Maine Ocean Observing System (GoMOOS) is a NOPP-funded project that 
is developing a system of buoys and CODAR to collect oceanographic and 
meteorological data in the Gulf of Maine and make these data available on continuous 
real-time basis.  GoMOOS is a pilot component of the Northeast Ocean Observing 
System (NEOOS) that is, in turn, planned as one of approximately six regional observing 
systems envisioned to constitute a national observing system.  GoMOOS is a consortium 
of scientists, policymakers, and industry, and the observing system is designed, not as a 
research project, but as a utility that will build, deploy, operate, transmit/process/archive 
data, and maintain the infrastructure required to do this.  The data and information 
produced will allow those who depend on the Gulf of Maine for their livelihood and well-
being, and those whose business is marine research, to undertake their pursuits and 
enhance the understanding of the Gulf more efficiently and profitably than ever before.  
The initial phase of GoMOOS will consist of 13 buoys placed strategically around the 
Gulf of Maine based on input from a variety of user groups, and a CODAR system with 
four sites that will provide coverage out to 200 km.

GoMOOS Data Products Summary

Wave products:
- Height
- Trends
- Nowcasts
- Forecasts

Meteorological.observations:
- Wind (hourly)
- Wind (4 times daily)
- Fog

Currents:
- Surface currents maps
- Water column currents
- Large scale circulation features
- Interannual variation

Temperature Patterns:
- Sea surface temperature
- SST composites
- Archives
- Water column temperature
Salinity
Dissolved Oxygen
Primary Productivity
Turbidity
Whale Sounds

Direct transfer of the data to scientists from GoMOOS can be effectively handled via 
DODS. A web-based graphical User Interface will be used to provide “user-friendly” 
data and data products that address the information requirements of Gulf user groups.


Nicholas Wolff –  Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences

He mentioned that he is here to get more familiar with what DODS is and to share that 
with researchers at Bigelow.  Nick works with Lew Incze who previously expressed an 
interest in DODS for serving several of his larval lobster time series with associated 
hydrographic data.


David Mountain – National Marine Fisheries Service

NMFS datasets for DODS

Now:	Historic current meter records (NetCDF).

Future:	Hydrographic	(~1500 CTD casts/yr)
	Zooplankton 	(~ 700 longo tows/yr)
			(monthly CPR transects)
	Fish		(monthly trawls/yr)

Problems/Needs:
Serving data – data in ORACLE
Retrieving data – plug-ins for ORACLE, S-Plus, Java?

David pointed out that the intention of NMFS is to serve all their data via DODS.  They 
currently have some Matlab and IDL users.

Bruce Tripp – Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute

Data to share:
Data sources at WHOI would be potential candidates for DODS.

ECOHAB data:
- PI’s sharing data and a website.
- Buoy data.

Multiple sources for Gulf of Maine data.
Historic aspect of data needs to be explored.
Contaminated sediment database from the Regional Marine Research Program in Gulf of 
Maine.
- Had multiple sources of data.
- Difficulty in critiquing the data to determine quality.
There is a new ocean observatory, the Martha’s Vineyard Coastal Ocean Observatory 
headed by Jim Edson.  He has created a multi-observatory website (draft version at this 
time).  However, the website probably won’t be used to house data.  There is 
collaboration between five coastal observatories on the East Coast.  They could 
potentially house a DODS server and share data.  Sediment transport and meteorology is 
the primary focus of the observatory groups.


Chuck Denham – USGS, Woods Hole

Data to share:
- Current meter data.
- Bathymetric data.
- Data is fairly distributed but have to know where to get it.
- Geographical range, Woods Hole (Gulf of ME, NY and NJ).
- EPIC formatted data for ADCP.  Data descriptors are needed for instruments.


Steve Hale –EPA Monitoring Assessment Program, EMAP  

MAIA – Estuary Report

Why Share Estuarine Data?
- Broad-scale and long-term ecological processes (e.g., eutrophication, global change).
- No single group can collect all the data. 

Impediments to data sharing.
Technology:
- Data formats
- Hardware

Sociological.

How to exchange data:
- Directories/catalogs/clearinghouses
- Standards (Z39.50)
- Publishing on the web

How to integrate:
Standards
Metadata
- Information on methods
- Information on data quality
Databases:
- Core DBMS
- Database constellation
- Centralized metadata, distributed data
- GIS

Coastal Zone 2000 Monitoring in the Northeast (map on display).

Showed metadata standard overhead.

EMAP Coastal zone works off an ORACLE database.

Bibliography on-line.

Don Byrne – NJ Division of Fish, Game and Wildlife (see Appendix B)

New Jersey has a trawl survey and is willing to share data from this survey that dates 
from 1988 to the present using DODS.  New Jersey data are not currently available on a 
server.


Wendell Brown – Univ. of Mass at Dartmouth

Built an archive at the University of New Hampshire, with metadata.
Physical oceanographic data.

Advanced Fisheries Management Information System (AFMIS)
Professors Brian Rothchild and Allan Robinson were major contributors.

Employs simple ecosystem models.

Components:
1. Sensors and platforms.
2. Data and knowledge.
3. Models with data assimilation.
4. Reports distributed to users.

Focus is on fisheries but can be used in other resource management functions.

Showed AFMIS functional elements.

Real-time forecast demonstration of concept (predicting where fish would be).

List of forecast products:
- Discussion of model initialization
- Discussion of forecast products
- Synoptic forecast images
Georges Bank plan view
Georges Bank vertical resources
- Tidal Velocity Forecast images


Paul Hemenway of URI, with the use of a flip chart, provided a graphical representation 
of how DODS works.  He stated that it takes some effort to put available datasets up on 
DODS.  DODS servers are specific to the data format you are serving (NetCDF, HDF, 
binary, ascii).  The DODS client is specific to the analysis package/language you are 
using (Matlab, IDL, EXCEL, etc.).

Dan Holloway explained that DODS has two ASCII servers:  FreeForm (handles binary 
very well and ASCII fairly well) and JGOFS (uses tree method object).  He discussed 
how JGOFS data is accessed through DODS.  Dan pointed out that data location is an 
issue, and quality of data is also important.  Bandwidth of data was also discussed.  
Finally, data need not be replicated (when considering setting up a separate server).


DODS Workshop Questions

Listed below are some of the more important regional questions and answers pertaining 
to DODS that were presented to the workshop participants:

What would it take to be a DODS server (basic information)?

An informational listing of items necessary to set up a server was thought to be very 
important. Maintenance issues should be among the topics covered. The DODS technical 
staff at URI could provide the informational listing and any support required.

What datasets will be served in the NE?

Most of the datasets discussed at the workshop were from the northern part of the 
Northeast region, i.e. Gulf of Maine and Georges Bank. More participation is needed 
from the mid-Atlantic regions.

Datasets in the Northeast:
- Fisheries databases
- GOMOOS and other observing systems
- ECOHAB
- AFMIS
- USGS – WHOI and MWRA
- NOS tidal gauge
- NOAA status and trends
- Coastal 2000
- REDIMS contaminants
- Fish data
- Shellfish
- Temperature data
- Climatology
- Shoreline data collected by USGS (with focus on monitoring before and after storms)
- Sediment transport data

Any modeling activities (data assimilation possibilities) by Lynch, Huije, GLOBEC.

Talking to the modeling community will be important!

Who is serving DODS datasets?  

PMEL
UCAR
URI
USGS
NGDC
Goddard
Lamar
BIO
Mass Bay Modeling

Number of DODS client sites (unknown); can download DODS clients and servers.

Is the DODS data model adequate for the datasets to be served in the NE?

It was emphasized that data residing in DBMS format be accessible via DODS.

The need for a data catalog(s) and the development of a template for the catalog was 
stressed:
-    Web-based.
- Would be compiled into a regional, centralized site.
- Searchable by keyword.
- Geographic.
- Should be able to serve up .gif and .jpeg images.
- Show links to informational pages describing the datasets.
- Would include pointers to URL’s for the actual data.


What are important interface issues for users in the region?

Being able to view generated maps and graphics would be useful.  Presently, DODS does 
not support data in ACCESS format.

What types of semantic metadata will be required and what semantic metadata 
standards will be used?

COARDS is the minimum standard so far.  Data providers are encouraged to submit a 
maximum amount but DODS only requires a minimum amount to serve datasets.  

Is a central regional node required to provide coordination including services such 
as user support, data location, etc.?

Yes, and the regional node should do the following:
- Provide user support until DODS users get up and running. Someone within each 
region, probably a person from an existing organization, should be chosen.  
- Setting up a DODS regional work group will be helpful.
- Other groups that were not in attendance at the regional workshop should be included 
(CT, NY, DE).
- Perhaps take DODS on the road to demonstrate its capabilities to others not at the 
regional workshop.
- An outreach component is needed.
- Get data online and document difficulty in using DODS.
- Have a contractor do a demo for other states and regional players.


Regional Pilot Project and Demonstration

From the presentations and group discussion it appears that DODS has focused 
(successfully) on large datasets and sophisticated users in the region.  The group felt that 
many good data produced by resource management agencies and research projects are yet 
to be found in small data sets housed on a variety of platforms and in a myriad of 
software.  Wider access to these data is desirable but it is assumed that the task of making 
them DODS accessible is a large task.  What actually would it cost an organization or 
agency in new software, hardware, and skills ...infrastructure as well as actual dollar 
expenses... to bring a data base on line in DODS?  A collaborative demonstration project 
between the NMFS and state fisheries agencies of ME, MA and NJ was discussed as one 
means to address this question and to guide others in the process. Simultaneously, this 
demo would guide DODS in the selection of new DODS-supplied data tools that would 
be broadly useful to the community.

The four agencies would have to assemble all fisheries data (documenting QA/QC, 
formats, software used, etc.)  This task could be large. DODS would support the task to 
bring all state fish data on line (perhaps initially via a single server at NMFS)  It is 
expected that partial QA/QC and different sampling methods might make inter-
comparison difficult.  Discussion and resolution of these issues would help to create a 
valuable regional dataset from the current collection of disconnected fragments.  A full-
time person, knowledgeable in fisheries and fieldwork, perhaps based at URI, would be 
needed to interact with state fishery staff to assist with in-state data conversion/formatting 
as an initial step.

Other groups of smaller datasets are held by marine labs and individual research projects 
that might also be assembled in a parallel DODS demonstration to assess datasets 
collected for different purposes and how to move them into the DODS system.

The demonstration pilot project should address the following:
(Ex: using fisheries data from NMFS, ME, MA, or NJ)
1.  Creating one or more DODS servers for NMFS, ME, NH, and NJ.
- Develop a GUI interface that has higher resolution for NE (similar to Matlab).
- It may need to be modified for non-Matlab users.
2.   Define what being a DODS client is for each agency (ex: EXCEL).
3.   Develop a web-based graphical demonstration using data from different sources.
4.   Provide an HTML template listing regional datasets (a simple catalog).
- The template should be able to get data from multiple remote sources and bring
back to a web-site for viewing.
5.   The demonstration project should include password protection.

Other issues concerning the demonstration project:
1. Who will create the demo was discussed with no resolution yet.
2. A technical person and data person would be needed to do the demo.
3. Have the demo up and running before the national meeting.
4. The group discussed the other possibilities for demonstration projects such as using 
contaminant data created by the USGS and MWRA or the northeast observing 
systems including the new Martha’s Vineyard Coastal Observatory.

Final Comments/Issues

1. Decisions need to be made on how much metadata needs to be attached to datasets. 
Currently, regional datasets may not have any metadata associated with them. 
Minimal semantic metadata standards need to be developed. 
2. The willingness of other players in the region to serve up data via DODS needs to be 
determined.
3. Natural resource agencies may not have adequate data management resources to 
implement DODS.  There will need to be considerable “hand holding” provided to 
less technically sophisticated users.  There will likely be different issues for different 
user groups. 
4. More client server development is needed.
5. The need for a PowerPoint quick demonstration of DODS.
6. Model outputs would be a useful data type served by DODS.
7. The desire to have biological data (fish data) served by DODS.


APPENDIX A

Attendee List

NOPP/DODS NE Regional Workshop
W. Alton Jones Campus, URI
January 8 – 10, 2001


NAME			ORGANIZATION		EMAIL

Wendell Brown			Umass Dartmouth		wbrown@umass.edu

Frank Bub			School for Marine Science	fbub@umassd.edu
				& Technology – SMST of
				Umass Dartmouth

Don Byrne			NJ Division of Fish		njfgwbyrne@plexi.com
				& Wildlife

Chuck Denham			USGS Woods Hole		cdenham@usgs.gov

John Evans			Univ. of Maine			jevans@umeoce.maine.edu

John Fracassi			Rutgers University		johnf@arctic.rutgers.edu

Jim Fritz			TPMC				jfritz@tpmc.com

Steve Hale			EPA – Narragansett Lab		hale.steve@epa.gov

Paul Hemenway		Univ. of R.I.			phemenway@gso.uri.edu

Dan Holloway			Univ. of R.I./DODS		d.holloway@gso.uri.edu

Linda Mercer			Maine Dept. of Marine		linda.mercer@state.me.us
				Resources

David Mountain		NMFS Woods Hole, MA	david.mountain@noaa.gov

David Remsen			Marine Biological Lab		dremsen@mbl.edu

Bruce Tripp			Woods Hole Oceanographic	btripp@whoi.edu
				Institute

Nicholas Wolff			Bigelow Lab			nwolff@bigelow.org


Appendix B

Ocean Monitoring Programs Conducted by
The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection




Agency	Program	 Variables	           Samples/Yr.       Surveys/Yr.      Starting Year          Offshore Limit

Bureau of Marine	Groundfish	   Fish & invert. no.,	   ~200		         5			1988		     90 ft. isobath   
Fisheries				   wt., length; temp.,			(~bi-monthly)
					   sal., DO (TSO);
					   sea state, weather
Bureau of		Surf Clam	   Surf clam vol.,	   ~350		1, summer		1988			3 n.m.
Shellfisheries				   no., length; (TSO)								     (State Waters)
Bureau of Marine	Bacteria	   Conc. of fecal	   ~200		     5-8			1976			3 n.m.
Water Monitoring			   coliform bacteria;							                  (State Waters)
			Nutrients	   Conc. of total	   ~140		4, quarterly		1989			3 n.m.
					   suspended solids,								       (State Waters)
					   NH3, NO3, NO2,
					   PO4, total N, TSO
			Phytoplankton   Phyto. Species,	        5		1, summer		1985			3 n.m.
					  cell conc., TSO								        (State Waters)


3

Technology Management & Planning Corp.	                                                    National Oceanographic Partnership Program
14
Scituate, MA  02066                                                                                                 Distributed Oceanographic Data System
                                                                                                                                                  Northeast Regional Workshop

